CE SOLARIUM C
A
P
S
R
E 
B 
Y
. U S. C
O 
M 
M 
I
S
S 
OI 
N
CO-CHAIRMEN 
Senator Angus King (I-Maine) 
MARCH 2020 Representative Mike Gallagher (R-Wisconsin) 
A WARNING FROM  
TOMORROW 
By Peter Singer and August Cole
You spend your whole career on Capitol Hill hoping for an office with a window. Then when you finally get it, all you want to do is look away. 
They set up our emergency offsite for essential Senate staff in vacant offices once belonging to  one of the contractors that lobbied us before they went belly-up last year. The offices are in a  high-rise in Rosslyn, with a literal million-dollar view; looking across the Potomac River, you can  see past the National Mall and the monuments all the way into downtown DC. 
And it just breaks your heart. 
The rainbow of colors in the window paints how everything went so wrong, so fast. The  water in the Potomac still has that red tint from when the treatment plants upstream were  hacked, their automated systems tricked into flushing out the wrong mix of chemicals.  By comparison, the water in the Lincoln Memorial Reflecting Pool has a purple glint to it.  They’ve pumped out the floodwaters that covered Washington’s low-lying areas after the  region’s reservoirs were hit in a cascade of sensor hacks. But the surge left behind an oily  sludge that will linger for who knows how long. That’s what you get from deciding in the  18th century to put your capital city in low-lying swampland and then in the 21st century  wiring up all its infrastructure to an insecure network. All around the Mall you can see the  black smudges of the delivery drones and air taxis that were remotely hijacked to crash into  crowds of innocents like fiery meteors. And in the open spaces and parks beyond, tiny dots  of bright colors smear together like some kind of tragic pointillist painting. These are the  camping tents and makeshift shelters of the refugees who fled the toxic railroad accident  caused by the control system failure in Baltimore. FEMA says it’s safe to go back, now that  the chemical cloud has dissipated. But with all the churn and disinfo on social media, no one  knows who or what to trust. Last night, the orange of their campfires was like a vigil of the  obstinate, waiting for everything to just return to the way it was. 
But it won’t.  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission i 
A knock on the door shakes me out of it. It’s the legislative director, checking back in. She’s  anxious because the boss promised that we’d get a draft of the bill out tonight to all the  other committees that touch on cybersecurity. No cars are online and nobody wants to risk  the Metro after what happened on the Blue Line, though, so it’ll mean hours of walking from  office to office. At least the irony of backpacking around paper printouts of new cybersecu rity laws will be lost on no one. 
I tell her that I’ll get it done and turn back to wordsmithing the preamble. I mostly mined the  language from old legislation that someone just like me wrote after the 9/11 attacks. I know  some online troll or talking head on the news will end up calling it lazy, but it’s the closest  anyone can think of as a parallel. Of course, with the servers down, our poor intern had to  run down a paper copy from the Library of Congress. 
Whereas, for as long as the United States has been the nation that invented and then  became dependent on the Internet, it has faced online threats; and 
Whereas, as these threats grew in scale and frequency, we grew too accustomed to digital  interference in our society, economy, and even elections; and 
Whereas, AI and automation changed these networks from use not just for communications  but to connect and operate the “things” that run our physical world; and 
Whereas, a new type of vulnerability thus emerged, where software could be not just a  means of theft, but a weapon of disruption and even physical destruction; and 
Whereas, our government and industry failed to keep pace with this change of technology  and threat, being ill-organized and ill-prepared; and 
Whereas, these vulnerabilities have just been exploited in extraordinary acts of treacherous  violence that caused massive loss of life and effectively held the nation hostage; and 
Whereas, such acts continue to pose a threat to the national security and very way of life of  the United States; 
Now, therefore, be it Resolved by the Senate and House of Representatives of the United  States of America in Congress assembled, that the government of the United States must…1 
“Must” what? 
What can we really do? No matter what legislation we pass now, after everything that’s  happened, we’re too late.
ii Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
CONTENTS 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 1 
THE CHALLENGE 8 
The Threat 8 Where Are We Now? 14 Where Are We Headed? 17 An Inflection Point 19 
HISTORICAL LEGACY AND  
METHODOLOGY 20 
Historical Legacy 20 Methodology 21 
STRATEGIC APPROACH:  
LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE 23 
The Strategic Logic Of Deterrence 26 
Defend Forward And Layered  
Cyber Deterrence 28 
The Implementation Of Layered  
Cyber Deterrence . . . . . . . . . . .29 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
Reform the U.S. Government’s Structure  
and Organization for Cyberspace 31 
Strengthen Norms and  
Non-military Tools 46 Promote National Resilience . . . . . .54 
Reshape the Cyber Ecosystem  
toward Greater Security . . . . . . . .71 
Operationalize Cybersecurity  
Collaboration with the Private Sector 96 
Preserve and Employ the Military  
Instrument of Power 110 
APPENDICES 
Appendix A: Roll-Up of  
Recommendations . . . . . . . . . .123 Appendix B: Legislative Proposals 127 Appendix C: Glossary 130 Appendix D: Abbreviations 140 
Appendix E: Government  
Structure for Cybersecurity 142 
Appendix F: Situating Layered  
Cyber Deterrence 144 Appendix G: Engagements . . . . . .146 Appendix H: Commissioners . . . . .149 Appendix I: Staff List 151 
Appendix J: Solarium Event  
Support . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .154 NOTES 155
Cyberspace Solarium Commission iii 
iv Cyberspace Solarium Commission
CHAIRMEN’S LETTER 
Our country is at risk, not only from a catastrophic cyberattack but from millions of daily intrusions disrupting  
everything from financial transactions to the inner workings of our electoral system. Capturing the complexity of this  challenge is hard. Even the man credited with inventing the term “cyberspace,” the science fiction author William Gibson,  would later criticize it as an “evocative and essentially meaningless” buzzword.2 
In studying this issue, it is easy to descend into a morass of classification, acronyms, jargon, and obscure government orga nization charts. To avoid that, we tried something different: an unclassified report that we hope will be found readable by  the very people who are affected by cyber insecurity—everyone. This report is also aimed squarely at action; it has numerous  recommendations addressing organizational, policy, and technical issues, and we included an appendix with draft bills that  Congress can rapidly act upon to put these ideas into practice and make America more secure.  
The reality is that we are dangerously insecure in cyber. Your entire life—your paycheck, your health care, your electric ity—increasingly relies on networks of digital devices that store, process, and analyze data. These networks are vulnerable,  if not already compromised. Our country has lost hundreds of billions of dollars to nation-state-sponsored intellectual  property theft using cyber espionage. A major cyberattack on the nation’s critical infrastructure and economic system would  create chaos and lasting damage exceeding that wreaked by fires in California, floods in the Midwest, and hurricanes in the  Southeast. 
To prevent this from happening, our report outlines a new cyber strategy and provides more than 75 recommendations for  action across the public and private sectors. Here are some big ideas to get the conversation started.  
First, deterrence is possible in cyberspace. Today most cyber actors feel undeterred, if not emboldened, to target our  personal data and public infrastructure. In other words, through our inability or unwillingness to identify and punish our  cyber adversaries, we are signaling that interfering in American elections or stealing billions in U.S. intellectual property is  acceptable. The federal government and the private sector must defend themselves and strike back with speed and agility.  This is difficult because the government is not optimized to be quick or agile, but we simply must be faster than our adver saries in order to prevent them from destroying our networks and, by extension, our way of life. Our strategy of layered cyber  deterrence is designed with this goal in mind. It combines enhanced resilience with enhanced attribution capabilities and a  clearer signaling strategy with collective action by our partners and allies. It is a simple framework laying out how we evolve  into a hard target, a good ally, and a bad enemy. 
Second, deterrence relies on a resilient economy. During the Cold War, our best minds were tasked with developing  Continuity of Government plans to ensure that the government could survive and the nation recover after a nuclear strike.  We need similar planning today to ensure that we can reconstitute in the aftermath of a national-level cyberattack. We  also need to ensure that our economy continues to run. We recommend that the government institute a Continuity of the  Economy plan to ensure that we can rapidly restore critical functions across corporations and industry sectors, and get the  economy back up and running after a catastrophic cyberattack. Such a plan is a fundamental pillar of deterrence—a way to  tell our adversaries that we, as a society, will survive to defeat them with speed and agility if they launch a major cyberattack  against us.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission v 
Third, deterrence requires government reform. We need to elevate and empower existing cyber agencies, particularly the  Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA), and create new focal points for coordinating cybersecurity in the  executive branch and Congress. To that end, we recommend the creation of a National Cyber Director with oversight from  new congressional Cybersecurity Committees, but our goal is not to create more bureaucracy with new and duplicative  roles and organizations. Rather, we propose giving existing organizations the tools they need to act with speed and agility to defend our networks and impose costs on our adversaries. The key is CISA, which we have tried to empower as the lead  agency for federal cybersecurity and the private sector’s preferred partner. We want working at CISA to become so appealing  to young professionals interested in national service that it competes with the NSA, the FBI, Google, and Facebook for top level talent (and wins). 
Fourth, deterrence will require private-sector entities to step up and strengthen their security posture. Most of our  critical infrastructure is owned by the private sector. That is why we make certain recommendations, such as establishing a  cloud security certification or modernizing corporate accountability reporting requirements. We do not want to saddle the  private sector with onerous and counterproductive regulations, nor do we want to force companies to hand over their data  to the federal government. We are not the Chinese Communist Party, and indeed our best path to beating our adversaries  is to stay free and innovative. But we need C-suite executives to take cyber seriously since they are on the front lines. With  support from the federal government, private-sector entities must be able to act with speed and agility to stop cyberattack ers from breaking out in their networks and the larger array of networks on which the nation relies. 
Fifth, election security must become a priority. The American people still do not have the assurance that our election sys tems are secure from foreign manipulation. If we don’t get election security right, deterrence will fail and future generations  will look back with longing and regret on the once powerful American Republic and wonder how we screwed the whole  thing up. We believe we need to continue appropriations to fund election infrastructure modernization at the state and local  levels. At the same time, states and localities need to pay their fair share to secure elections, and they can draw on useful  resources—such as nonprofits that can act with greater speed and agility across all 50 states—to secure elections from the  bottom up rather than waiting for top-down direction and funding. We also need to ensure that regardless of the method of  casting a vote, paper or electronic, a paper audit trail exists (and yes, we recognize the irony of a cyber commission recom mending a paper trail). 
We didn’t solve everything in this report. We didn’t even agree on everything. There are areas, such as balancing maximum  encryption versus mandatory lawful access to devices, where the best we could do was provide a common statement of  principles. Yet every single Commissioner was willing to make compromises in the course of our work because we were all  united by the recognition that the status quo is not getting the job done. The status quo is inviting attacks on America every  second of every day. The status quo is a slow surrender of American power and responsibility. We all want that to stop. So  please do us, and your fellow Americans, a favor. Read this report and then demand that your government and the private  sector act with speed and agility to secure our cyber future. 
  
  

Senator Angus King (I-Maine) Representative Mike Gallagher (R-Wisconsin) Co-Chairman Co-Chairman 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission Cyberspace Solarium Commission
vi Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
AN URGENT CALL TO ACTION 
For over 20 years, nation-states and non-state actors have used cyberspace to subvert American power, American secu rity, and the American way of life. Despite numerous criminal indictments, economic sanctions, and the development of  robust cyber and non-cyber military capabilities, the attacks against the United States have continued. The perpetrators  saw that their onslaught damaged the United States without triggering a significant retaliation. Chinese cyber operators  stole hundreds of billions of dollars in intellectual property to accelerate China’s military and economic rise and undermine  U.S. military dominance.3 Russian operators and their proxies damaged public trust in the integrity of American elections  and democratic institutions.4 China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea all probed U.S. critical infrastructure with impunity.  Criminals leveraged globally connected networks to steal assets from individuals, companies, and governments. Extremist  groups used these networks to raise funds and recruit followers, increasing transnational threats and insecurity. American  restraint was met with unchecked predation.5 
The digital connectivity that has brought economic growth, technological dominance, and an improved quality of life  to nearly every American has also created a strategic dilemma. The more digital connections people make and data they  exchange, the more opportunities adversaries have to destroy private lives, disrupt critical infrastructure, and damage our  economic and democratic institutions. The United States now operates in a cyber landscape that requires a level of data  security, resilience, and trustworthiness that neither the U.S. government nor the private sector alone is currently equipped  to provide. Moreover, shortfalls in agility, technical expertise, and unity of effort, both within the U.S. government and  between the public and private sectors, are growing. 
The 2019 National Defense Authorization Act chartered the U.S. Cyberspace Solarium Commission to address this challenge.  The President and Congress tasked the Commission to answer two fundamental questions: What strategic approach will defend  the United States against cyberattacks of significant consequences? And what policies and legislation are required to implement  that strategy? 
THE STRATEGY 
After conducting an extensive study including over 300 interviews, a competitive strategy event modeled after the original  Project Solarium in the Eisenhower administration, and stress tests by external red teams, the Commission advocates a new  strategic approach to cybersecurity: layered cyber deterrence. The desired end state of layered cyber deterrence is a reduced  probability and impact of cyberattacks of significant consequence. The strategy outlines three ways to achieve this end state: 
1. Shape behavior. The United States must work with allies and partners to promote responsible behavior in cyberspace. 2. Deny benefits. The United States must deny benefits to adversaries who have long exploited cyberspace to their advan tage, to American disadvantage, and at little cost to themselves. This new approach requires securing critical networks in  collaboration with the private sector to promote national resilience and increase the security of the cyber ecosystem. 3. Impose costs. The United States must maintain the capability, capacity, and credibility needed to retaliate against actors  who target America in and through cyberspace.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 1 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Each of the three ways described above involves a deterrent layer that increases American public- and private-sector security by  altering how adversaries perceive the costs and benefits of using cyberspace to attack American interests. These three deterrent  layers are supported by six policy pillars that organize more than 75 recommendations. These pillars represent the means to  implement layered cyber deterrence. 
While deterrence is an enduring American strategy, there are two factors that make layered cyber deterrence bold and  distinct. First, the approach prioritizes deterrence by denial, specifically by increasing the defense and security of cyberspace  through resilience and public- and private-sector collaboration. Reducing the vulnerabilities adversaries can target denies  them opportunities to attack American interests through cyberspace. Second, the strategy incorporates the concept of  “defend forward” to reduce the frequency and severity of attacks in cyberspace that do not rise to a level that would warrant  the full spectrum of retaliatory responses, including military responses. Though the concept originated in the Department  of Defense, the Commission integrates defend forward into a national strategy for securing cyberspace using all the instru ments of power. Defend forward posits that to disrupt and defeat ongoing adversary campaigns, the United States must pro actively observe, pursue, and counter adversaries’ operations and impose costs short of armed conflict. This posture signals to  adversaries that the U.S. government will respond to cyberattacks, even those below the level of armed conflict that do not  cause physical destruction or death, with all the tools at its disposal and consistent with international law. 
THE IMPLEMENTATION 
Foundation: Government Reform 
The three layers of cyber deterrence rest on a common foundation: the need to reform how the U.S. government is organized  to secure cyberspace and respond to attacks. The U.S. government is currently not designed to act with the speed and agility  necessary to defend the country in cyberspace. We must get faster and smarter, improving the government’s ability to organize  concurrent, continuous, and collaborative efforts to build resilience, respond to cyber threats, and preserve military options  that signal a capability and willingness to impose costs on adversaries. Reformed government oversight and organization that is  properly resourced and staffed, in alignment with a strategy of layered cyber deterrence, will enable the United States to reduce  the probability, magnitude, and effects of significant attacks on its networks. 
Pillar: Reform the U.S. Government’s Structure and Organization for Cyberspace. While cyberspace has transformed the  American economy and society, the government has not kept up. Existing government structures and jurisdictional bound aries fracture cyber policymaking processes, limit opportunities for government action, and impede cyber operations. Rapid,  comprehensive improvements at all levels of government are necessary to change these dynamics and ensure that the U.S.  government can protect the American people, their way of life, and America’s status as a global leader. Major recommenda tions in this pillar are: 
• The executive branch should issue an updated National Cyber Strategy (1.1) that reflects the strategic approach of  layered cyber deterrence and emphasizes resilience, public-private collaboration, and defend forward as key elements. 
• Congress should establish House Permanent Select and Senate Select Committees on Cybersecurity (1.2) to provide  integrated oversight of the cybersecurity efforts dispersed across the federal government.
2 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
• Congress should establish a Senate-confirmed National Cyber Director (NCD) (1.3), supported by an Office of the  NCD, within the Executive Office of the President. The NCD will be the President’s principal advisor for cybersecuri ty-related issues, as well as lead national-level coordination of cybersecurity strategy and policy, both within government  and with the private sector. 
• Congress should strengthen the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) (1.4) in its mission to  ensure the national resilience of critical infrastructure, promote a more secure cyber ecosystem, and serve as the central  coordinating element to support and integrate federal, state and local, and private-sector cybersecurity efforts. Congress  must invest significant resources in CISA and provide it with clear authorities to realize its full potential. 
• Congress and the executive branch should pass legislation and implement policies designed to better recruit, develop,  and retain cyber talent (1.5) while acting to deepen the pool of candidates for cyber work in the federal government. 
Layer 1: Shape Behavior 
In the first layer, the strategy calls for shaping responsible behavior and encouraging restraint in cyberspace by strengthening  norms and non-military instruments. Effective norms will not emerge without American leadership. For this reason, the  United States needs to build a coalition of partners and allies to secure its shared interests and values in cyberspace. 
Pillar: Strengthen Norms and Non-military Tools. A system of norms, built through international engagement and coop eration, promotes responsible behavior and, over time, dissuades adversaries from using cyber operations to undermine  any nation’s interests. The United States and others have agreed to norms of responsible behavior for cyberspace, but they  go largely unenforced today. The United States can strengthen the current system of cyber norms by using non-military  tools, including law enforcement actions, sanctions, diplomacy, and information sharing, to more effectively persuade  states to conform to these norms and punish those who violate them. Such punishment requires developing the ability  to quickly and accurately attribute cyberattacks. Building a coalition of like-minded allies and partners willing to col lectively use these instruments to support a rules-based international order in cyberspace will better hold malign actors  accountable. The major recommendations in this pillar are: 
• Congress should create an Assistant Secretary of State (2.1) in the Department of State, with a new Bureau of  Cyberspace Security and Emerging Technologies, who will lead the U.S. government effort to develop and reinforce  international norms in cyberspace. This will help promote international norms that support and reflect U.S. interests  and values while creating benefits for responsible state behavior through engagement with allies and partners. 
• The executive branch should engage actively and effectively in forums setting international information and com munications technology standards (2.1.2). Specifically, the National Institute of Standards and Technology should  facilitate robust and integrated participation by the federal government, academia, professional societies, and industry. 
• Congress should take steps to improve international tools for law enforcement activities in cyberspace (2.1.4),  including streamlining the Mutual Legal Assistance Treaty and Mutual Legal Assistance Agreement process and increas ing the number of FBI Cyber Assistant Legal Attachés.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 3 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
Layer 2: Deny Benefits  
In the second layer, the strategy calls for denying benefits to adversaries by promoting national resilience, reshaping the cyber  ecosystem, and advancing the government’s relationship with the private sector to establish an enhanced level of common  situational awareness and joint collaboration. The United States needs a whole-of-nation approach to secure its interests and  institutions in cyberspace.  
Pillar: Promote National Resilience. Resilience—the capacity to withstand and quickly recover from attacks that could cause  harm or coerce, deter, restrain, or otherwise shape U.S. behavior—is key to denying adversaries the benefits of their opera tions and reducing confidence in their ability to achieve their strategic ends. National resilience efforts rely on the ability of  the United States, in both the public and private sectors, to accurately identify, assess, and mitigate risk across all elements  of critical infrastructure. The nation must be sufficiently prepared to respond to and recover from an attack, sustain critical  functions even under degraded conditions, and, in some cases, restart critical functionality after disruption. Major recom mendations in this pillar are: 
• Congress should codify responsibilities and ensure sufficient resources (3.1) for the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure  Security Agency and sector-specific agencies in the identification, assessment, and management of national and  sector-specific risk. 
• Congress should direct the U.S. government to develop and maintain Continuity of the Economy planning (3.2) in  consultation with the private sector to ensure continuous operation of critical functions of the economy in the event of  a significant cyber disruption. 
• Congress should codify a Cyber State of Distress tied to a Cyber Response and Recovery Fund (3.3) to ensure  sufficient resources and capacity to respond rapidly to significant cyber incidents. 
• Congress should improve the structure and sustain the funding of the Election Assistance Commission (3.4), enabling  it to increase its operational capacity to support states and localities in defense of the digital election infrastructure that  underpins federal elections and to ensure the widest use of voter-verifiable, auditable, and paper-based voting systems.  
• The U.S. government should promote digital literacy, civics education, and public awareness (3.5) to build societal  resilience to foreign, malign cyber-enabled information operations. 
Pillar: Reshape the Cyber Ecosystem toward Greater Security. Raising the baseline level of security across the cyber ecosystem— the people, processes, data, and technology that constitute and depend on cyberspace—will constrain and limit adversaries’  activities. Over time, this will reduce the frequency, scope, and scale of their cyber operations. Because the vast majority of  this ecosystem is owned and operated by the private sector, scaling up security means partnering with the private sector and  adjusting incentives to produce positive outcomes. In some cases, that requires aligning market forces. In other cases, where  
those forces either are not present or do not adequately address risk, the U.S. government must explore legislation, regula tion, executive action, and public- as well as private-sector investments. Major recommendations in this pillar are:
4 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
• Congress should establish and fund a National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority (4.1) empow ered to establish and manage a program on security certifications and labeling of information and communications  technology products. 
• Congress should pass a law establishing that final goods assemblers of software, hardware, and firmware are liable  for damages from incidents that exploit known and unpatched vulnerabilities (4.2) for as long as they support a  product or service. 
• Congress should establish a Bureau of Cyber Statistics (4.3) charged with collecting and providing statistical data  on cybersecurity and the cyber ecosystem to inform policymaking and government programs. 
• Congress should resource and direct the Department of Homeland Security to fund a federally funded research and  development center (4.4) to work with state-level regulators to develop certifications for cybersecurity insurance  products. 
• The National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority should develop a cloud security certification (4.5),  in consultation with the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Office of Management and Budget, and  the Department of Homeland Security. 
• Congress should direct the U.S. government to develop and implement an industrial base strategy for information  and communications technology to ensure trusted supply chains (4.6) and the availability of critical information  and communications technologies. 
• Congress should pass a national data security and privacy protection law (4.7) establishing and standardizing  requirements for the collection, retention, and sharing of user data. 
Pillar: Operationalize Cybersecurity Collaboration with the Private Sector. Unlike in other physical domains, in cyberspace  the government is often not the primary actor. Instead, it must support and enable the private sector. The government  must build and communicate a better understanding of threats, with the specific aim of informing private-sector secu rity operations, directing government operational efforts to counter malicious cyber activities, and ensuring better com mon situational awareness for collaborative action with the private sector. Further, while recognizing that private-sector  entities have primary responsibility for the defense and security of their networks, the U.S. government must bring  to bear its unique authorities, resources, and intelligence capabilities to support these actors in their defensive efforts.  Major recommendations in this pillar are: 
• Congress should codify the concept of “systemically important critical infrastructure” (5.1), whereby entities  responsible for systems and assets that underpin national critical functions are ensured the full support of the U.S.  government and shoulder additional security requirements befitting their unique status and importance. 
• Congress should establish and fund a Joint Collaborative Environment (5.2), a common and interoperable environ ment for sharing and fusing threat information, insights, and other relevant data across the federal government and  between the public and private sectors.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 5 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
• Congress should direct the executive branch to strengthen a public-private, integrated cyber center in CISA (5.3) to  support its critical infrastructure security and resilience mission and to conduct a one-year, comprehensive systems  analysis review of federal cyber and cybersecurity centers. 
• The executive branch should establish a Joint Cyber Planning Cell (5.4) under CISA to coordinate cybersecurity  planning and readiness across the federal government and between the public and private sectors. 
Layer 3: Impose Costs  
In the final layer, the strategy outlines how to impose costs to deter future malicious behavior and reduce ongoing adver sary activities short of armed conflict through the employment of all instruments of power in the defense of cyberspace,  including systemically important critical infrastructure. A key, but not the only, element of cost imposition is the military  instrument of power. Therefore, the United States must maintain the capacity, resilience, and readiness to employ cyber and  non-cyber capabilities across the spectrum of engagement from competition to crisis and conflict. The United States needs  ready and resilient capabilities to thwart and respond to adversary action.  
Pillar: Preserve and Employ the Military Instrument of Power—and All Other Options to Deter Cyberattacks at Any Level. Cyberspace is already an arena of strategic competition, where states project power, protect their interests, and punish their  adversaries. Future contingencies and conflicts will almost certainly contain a cyber component. In this environment, the  United States must defend forward to limit malicious adversary behavior below the level of armed attack, deter conflict, and,  if necessary, prevail by employing the full spectrum of its capabilities, using all the instruments of national power. Examples of  adversary actions below armed attack include cyber-enabled attacks on the U.S. election systems or cyber-enabled intellectual  property theft. To achieve these ends, the U.S. government must demonstrate its ability to impose costs, while establishing a  clear declaratory policy that signals to rival states the costs and risks associated with attacking the United States in cyberspace.  Furthermore, conventional weapons and nuclear capabilities require cybersecurity and resilience to ensure that the United  States preserves credible deterrence and the full range of military response options. The United States must be confident that its  military capabilities will work as intended. Finally, across the spectrum of engagement from competition to crisis and conflict,  the United States must ensure that it has sufficient cyber forces to accomplish strategic objectives in and through cyberspace.  This demands sufficient capacity, capabilities, and streamlined decision-making processes to enable rapid and effective cyber  response options to impose costs against adversaries. Major recommendations in this pillar include: 
• Congress should direct the Department of Defense to conduct a force structure assessment of the Cyber Mission  Force (6.1) to ensure that the United States has the appropriate force structure and capabilities in light of growing  mission requirements and increasing expectations, in both scope and scale. This should include an assessment of the  resource implications for the National Security Agency in its combat support agency role.  
• Congress should direct the Department of Defense to conduct a cybersecurity vulnerability assessment of all seg ments of the nuclear control systems and continually assess weapon systems’ cyber vulnerabilities (6.2).  
• Congress should require Defense Industrial Base (DIB) participation in threat intelligence sharing programs  (6.2.1) and threat hunting on DIB networks (6.2.2).
6 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
THE WAY FORWARD 
The status quo in cyberspace is unacceptable. The current state of affairs invites aggression and establishes a dangerous pattern  of actors attacking the United States without fear of reprisal. Adversaries are increasing their cyber capabilities while U.S.  vulnerabilities continue to grow. There is much that the U.S. government can do to improve its defenses and reduce the risk  of a significant attack, but it is clear that government action alone is not enough. Most of the critical infrastructure that drives  the American economy, spurs technological innovation, and supports the U.S. military resides in the private sector. If the U.S.  government cannot find a way to seamlessly collaborate with the private sector to build a resilient cyber ecosystem, the nation  will never be secure. And, eventually, a massive cyberattack could lead to large-scale physical destruction, sparking a response of  haphazard government overreach that stifles innovation in the digital economy and further erodes American strength. 
To avoid these outcomes, the U.S. government must move to adopt the new strategy detailed in this report—layered cyber  deterrence—and the more than 75 recommendations designed to make this approach a reality. The executive branch and  Congress should give these recommendations and the associated legislative proposals close consideration. Congress should also  consider ways to monitor, assess, and report on the implementation of this report’s recommendations over the next two years. 
Layered Cyber Deterrence
LAYER 1.  
Shape Behavior   
Build  
Desired  
End State 
Reduce the  
frequency and  severity of cyber  attacks of signifi cant consequence.  
Limit the ability of  great powers,  
Foundation  
LAYER 2.  
Deny Benefits 
LAYER 3.  
Impose Costs 
Generate  
Cyber 
Capabilities  
Partnerships 
Secure  
Elections 
Protect  
Critical  
Infrastructure 
rogue states,  
extremists, and  criminals to under mine American  power and  
influence. 
Reform the  
U.S. Government 
& Capacity Leverage  Non-military  
Instruments 
Ensure Continuity  
of the Economy 
Defend Forward 
concurrent, continuous, collaborative 
  
  

Cyberspace Solarium Commission 7 
THE CHALLENGE  
THE THREAT 
The NotPetya attack illustrates the changing character of  cyber threats. The chaos started in battle-torn Ukraine.6 In  June 2017 Russian cyber operators launched destructive  malware adapted from a series of widespread vulnerabili ties common to unpatched Windows operating systems.  Because it exploited operating system vulnerabilities in  wide use across innumerable private- and public-sector  applications, the NotPetya attack quickly spread from  targeted Ukrainian banks, payment systems, and federal  agencies to power plants, hospitals, and other life-critical  systems worldwide. The attack even affected the Windows based radiation-monitoring systems in the Chernobyl  nuclear power plant.7 Global companies from Maersk—a  shipping and logistics firm—and FedEx’s European sub sidiary to pharmaceutical companies found their systems  offline, with losses estimated as high as $10 billion. In  an ironic twist of fate, the reckless nature of the malware  allowed the infection to spread to Russia, where it hit  Rosneft, the leading Kremlin-linked oil and gas produc er.8 NotPetya affected tens of thousands of individuals,  organizations, and businesses around the world. Yet most  Americans were completely unaware of the damage. 
NotPetya, while far from the first cyberattack, exemplifies  the potential chaos that major cyberattacks can cause.  Like an infection in the bloodstream, the malware spread  along global supply chains.  
From China, Russia, Iran, and North Korea to extremist  groups and criminals, a broad array of threat actors are  exploiting global connectivity to achieve their objectives.  These objectives range from undermining American eco nomic and military power to suppressing political rivals to  stealing money and seeking illicit gain. Even if the United  States is not the intended target, the interconnected nature  of cyberspace may still render the nation a victim. Without  
Major U.S. Public-Sector Cyber Threats 
• Attacks on election processes and other demo cratic institutions designed to damage American  legitimacy and weaken the nation. 
• Espionage efforts intended to undermine  both U.S. military capability and the Defense  Industrial Base. 
• Targeting of civilian agencies for intelligence  collection and to obtain other advantages over  the United States. 
• Loss of leadership in research and development  of key technologies. 
Absent significant reform, adversaries will continue to  target U.S. elections and erode U.S. military advan tages through cyber operations designed to steal sensitive  data, while U.S. technical leadership in research and  development will continue to decline.
a new strategy to secure cyberspace, a more connected  world will be a more vulnerable world.  
Cyber operations offer adversaries—including non-state  actors—instruments of coercion, sabotage, espionage,  and extortion optimized for the 21st century.9 These new  tools take advantage of the terrain, exploiting the inherent  vulnerability of the digital networks on which the United  States and other countries rely.10 As more people and  devices connect to each other, the power and reach of cyber  operations grow. Great powers can pressure rivals without  committing military forces and declaring their intent—for  example, by holding their critical infrastructure at risk with  threats of blackouts and disruption.11 Regional powers  target critical commercial networks, from the financial  system to the global energy supply chain, to raise the  costs and risks associated with U.S. military operations.  Extremist groups rely on social networks for recruitment  
8 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
Major U.S. Private-Sector Cyber Threats • Cybercrime and ransomware that exploit  people, processes, and systems for individual  financial gain or to fund criminal enterprises.  • Intellectual property (IP) theft that hinders  long-term growth and prosperity and jeopar dizes U.S. leadership in key technologies. 
• Holding private-sector critical infrastructure  at risk to influence the decision making of  
American leaders at times of conflict or height ened tension.  
Absent significant reform, adversaries will continue  stealing hundreds of billions of dollars from businesses  and individuals, conducting widespread theft of U.S. technologies, and accessing the electrical grid, water  treatment facilities, financial institutions, and other  critical infrastructure.
and radicalization. Criminals plunder individuals, compa nies, and even states by exploiting network vulnerabilities.  Unless there is a significant change in how the United  States and other free nations approach cybersecurity, these  trends will only get worse and jeopardize the connectivity  on which the world depends. 
Our modern way of life depends on the integrity, confi dentiality, and availability of data. From medical records,  financial information, and our most personal communi cations to modern military operations, the individual and  the state rely on data. But as we increase our reliance on  data, our adversaries have developed new tools that hold  data and essential information systems at risk. The entire  system through which data flows into products, devices,  and services is vulnerable.  
This threat is compounded by new technologies that  enable more sophisticated cyberattacks at greater scale  for lower cost, and by a host of capable adversaries who  have demonstrated a willingness and ability to adapt to  U.S. prevention and response measures. These adversaries  
THE CHALLENGE 
have moved beyond simple denial-of-service and website  defacement campaigns to conducting intelligence col lection, ransomware attacks, and destructive operations,  as well as disruptive attacks on critical infrastructure.  Increasingly these attacks revolve around compromising  the technological systems used to collect, process, and  analyze data. 
State Cyber Threats  
Every state with a modern military possesses cyber capabil ity. Great powers like China and Russia use cyber opera tions to enable their warfighting capabilities, advance their  interests short of armed conflict, and undermine American  economic strength, political will, and military might.12 
China uses cyberspace to accelerate its economic rise,  undermine U.S. comparative strength, and suppress polit ical opponents at home and abroad.13 Chinese advanced  persistent threat (APT) groups steal intellectual property  and sensitive national security information. Beijing wages  cyber-enabled economic warfare to fuel its rise while  simultaneously undercutting U.S. economic and military  superiority. Chinese cyber campaigns have enabled the  theft of trillions of dollars in intellectual property.14 At  the same time, Chinese APTs’ aggressive cyber-enabled  intelligence collection operations provide Chinese officials  with improved intelligence information to use against the  United States and its allies. Chinese operators constantly  scan U.S. government and private-sector networks to  identify vulnerabilities they can later exploit in a crisis.  Targeting America’s weapons and Defense Industrial Base  enables Beijing to undermine opponents from within: for  example, by threatening the U.S. Defense Industrial Base  or driving a wedge between America and its allies.15 Taken  to the extreme, China has the ability to launch cyberattacks  in the United States that could cause localized, temporary  disruptive effects on critical infrastructure—such as disrup tion of a natural gas pipeline—for days to weeks.16 
Moreover, the Chinese Communist Party routinely  harasses foreign and domestic dissidents in cyberspace  while state-linked firms build a global mass-surveillance  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 9 
THE CHALLENGE 
capability connecting information and communications  equipment, surveillance cameras, facial recognition  software, and massive data sets of private citizens. China  is exporting these intrusive practices and technologies  abroad, fueling a trend toward digital authoritarianism that  threatens democracy at a global scale.17 Chinese national  companies like Huawei are part of an integrated strategy to  use predatory pricing to dominate and eventually monop olize key information and communications technology  supply chains. The goal is to drive non-Chinese alternatives  out of business, leaving the Chinese Communist Party and  its business allies with a stranglehold on the global supply  chain. As China exports this equipment, it becomes the  central hub of a new network of authoritarian states that  use mass surveillance and technologies of control, such  as social credit, to suppress fundamental human rights.  Unchecked, Chinese economic warfare, espionage, and  repression of civil liberties are likely to continue.  
Without a new whole-of-nation strategy and significant  changes to how the United States defends its networks in  cyberspace, Chinese operations will continue to threaten  long-term American economic prosperity and national  security. Revelations of high-profile security failures of  information will undermine confidence in the U.S. govern ment’s ability to protect its citizens and businesses. Along  with the loss in national power, trust in American institu tions will wither. In the minds of regional allies, percep tions of unchallenged Chinese operations will reduce the  credibility of American security guarantees. Exfiltration of  private-sector intellectual property could compel investors  to question the viability of the U.S. economy as a hub of  technological innovation. Breaches could also yield intel ligence coups that threaten the United States’ clandestine  personnel and advance Beijing’s diplomatic and economic  goals. Stolen U.S. military technology will enable the  production of capable facsimiles and support the design  of People’s Liberation Army weapon systems that exploit  newly identified vulnerabilities in U.S. counterparts.  Compromised supply chains could undermine American  military operations in future wars.18 China is seeking to  monopolize how people around the world interact, pay 
Major Cyber Operations Publicly  Attributed to China: 2006–2019 
• 2006–18: APT10 conducts a systematic  cyber espionage campaign stealing intellectual  property and compromising computer systems  containing personally identifiable information  on over 100,000 U.S. Navy personnel.19 
• 2008: Operators exfiltrate terabytes of data  and schematics from the F-35 and F-22 stealth  fighter jet programs.20 
• 2012: China compromises computers in a  new African Union headquarters it helped  build in Ethiopia with malware that exports  massive amounts of data nightly to servers in  Shanghai.21 
• 2012: Chinese groups target oil and natural gas  pipelines in the United States.22 
• 2013: IP Commission Report highlights Chinese  efforts at intellectual property theft efforts  linked to an estimated $300 billion in business  losses a year.23 
• 2014: Cloud Hopper campaign attacks managed  service providers to access their client networks,  including those of leading international technol ogy companies, and steal their clients’ intellectual  property.24 
• 2014–15: The Office of Personnel Management  is breached, exposing sensitive information used  for security background checks on 21 million  federal employees.25 
• 2017: Chinese military hackers breach the net works of Equifax, an American credit reporting  agency, stealing the personal information of  over 145 million Americans.26 
• 2018: Hackers breach servers of Marriott  International, extracting information on 500  million guests.27 
• 2019: Operators compromise iPhones in a  domestic spying campaign targeting Uighurs,  a Muslim minority in China.28
10 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
THE CHALLENGE 
for goods, and relate to their governments. As Chinese 
built networks and applications mediate interactions,  Beijing gains unprecedented power to surveil and  control the lives of individuals worldwide. Civil liber ties and open markets will struggle to survive in this  new era of cyber repression. China presents a persistent  cyber espionage threat and a growing attack threat to  our core military and critical infrastructure systems.  China remains the most active strategic competitor  responsible for cyber espionage against the U.S.  government, corporations, and allies. It is improving  its cyberattack capabilities and altering information  online, shaping Chinese views and potentially the views  of U.S. citizens.29 
Russia, a revanchist power, turns to cyber operations to  undermine U.S. and allied interests. A mix of spies and  criminal networks often masks Moscow’s role. Across  multiple operations, from elections to public referen dums, the Kremlin has combined cyber intrusions and  propaganda to distort democratic processes, weaken trust  in institutions, and sow chaos in liberal democratic soci eties. Leading into the 2016 and 2018 elections, Russian  online trolls whipped into a digital frenzy the factions the  Federalist Papers cautioned against more than 230 years  ago. The resulting breakdown in political will and social  cohesion limits the ability of Western nations to check  Russia’s advances in states that formerly belonged to the  Soviet Union.30 
During recent armed conflicts, Russia used cyber capabil ities both to enhance military operations and to conduct  information operations campaigns designed to isolate  their opponents.31 In peacetime competition, Russian  operators signal the risk of escalation by probing critical  infrastructure across NATO member states.32 The open ness, connectivity, and commitment to shared interna tional norms of liberal democracies are a threat to Russia’s  interests.33 By subverting these ideas, exploiting cracks in  international alliance networks, and subtly encouraging  domestic instability, the Kremlin hopes to achieve its  strategic objectives without risking all-out war.  
Major Cyber Operations Publicly  
Attributed to Russia: 2007–2019 
• 2007: Using distributed denial-of-service  attacks, Russian hackers target the websites  of Estonian government entities, banks, and  media properties in one of the first sophisti cated and wide-scale cyberattacks in support of  strategic objectives.34 
• 2008: During the Russo-Georgian War, a series  of cyberattacks disable and deface the websites  of Georgian government and private-sector  entities.35 
• 2015: As war rages in eastern Ukraine, Russian  hackers cripple three Ukrainian energy  
companies, disrupting power for millions of  customers.36 
• 2016: During the 2016 U.S. presidential cam paign, Russian operatives use cyber operations  to collect on political parties and candidates  and conduct influence operations using social  media.37 
• 2017: NotPetya attack spills out of Ukraine,  affecting businesses globally.38 
• 2017: Russia-linked groups target nuclear  power plants in the United States, gain 
ing access to business and administrative  
networks.39 
• 2017–18: Russia-linked groups target critical  infrastructure ranging from electricity to health  care systems, and compromise router traffic  globally.40
Left unchecked, Russian cyber operations will continue  to increase in sophistication and frequency. Moscow will  target democratic institutions, military assets, and critical  infrastructure in the United States and its liberal demo cratic allies, as well as the smaller neighbors Russia views  as modern-day tributary states (its near abroad). Russian  interference in U.S. elections in 2016 and 2018, as well  as in elections in Europe, was part of a longer, larger  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 11 
THE CHALLENGE 
campaign to undermine democracy and its institutions. It  was also an indicator of future operations that will target  voting systems and the broader information environment  in new and dangerous ways.41 A key priority of Russian  cyber operations will be to degrade the strategic cohesion  of Western alliance and security cooperation networks,  especially NATO.42 And if these structures decline, Russia’s  neighbors will be increasingly vulnerable to sophisticated  cyber and influence operations, resulting in a network of  central and eastern European states subservient to Moscow.  Unencumbered by international norms and empowered by  new technologies, the Kremlin will further refine its use of  cyber operations to advance its strategic objectives at the  expense of the United States and its allies and partners. 
Regional powers increasingly exploit cyberspace to  advance revisionist interests. These cyber-enabled rogue  states are often more willing to accept risk and more  brazen than China and Russia, launching large-scale  cyberattacks against commercial firms and suppressing  dissidents. Lacking conventional tools sufficient to  achieve their political and economic objectives, these  states exploit their newfound cyber capabilities to steal  funds for illicit purposes, disrupt international com merce, and threaten their adversaries.  
Iran uses cyber operations to undermine the U.S. deter rent posture and network of alliances in the Middle East.  In place of a nuclear deterrent, Tehran relies on the threat  of cyber intrusions, proxy groups, terrorists, and ballis tic missiles to hold other states at risk.43 Iranian cyber  operations focus on the commercial networks of energy  and finance entities of particular importance to the  global economy. They leverage the inherent difficulties of  coordinating cyber defenses between public and private  partnerships and sovereign states. Unless it faces a more  robust deterrent, Iran will continue to view cyber opera tions as a low-cost means of ensuring regime survival and  achieving regional goals. 
Like other autocratic states, Iran is becoming a digital  authoritarian. Groups linked to the Iranian regime turn  
Major Cyber Operations Publicly  
Attributed to Iran: 2011–2019 
• 2011–13: Iran targets 46 U.S. financial  
institutions and companies and a dam in Rye,  New York, with distributed denial-of-service  attacks.44 
• 2012: Iran conducts destructive attacks against  the Saudi Arabian state-owned oil firm, Saudi  Aramco, with the Shamoon malware, which  result in 30,000 computers being taken offline  and rendered unusable.45 
• 2013: Through computer intrusions Iranian based Mabna Institute actors commit wire  
fraud, unauthorized access of a computer, and  aggravated identity theft, stealing more than  30 terabytes of academic data and intellectual  property valued at $3.4 billion.46 
• 2014: Iranian hackers attack the Sands Casino,  infecting multiple systems and wiping hard  
drives.47 
• 2017: Iran launches Shamoon 2, affecting 15  government agencies and organizations in Saudi  Arabia.48 
• 2018: Shamoon 2 hits an Italian oil services  company, taking hundreds of servers and  
computers offline.49 
• 2019: APT39, an Iranian-linked group, is impli cated in a widespread cyber espionage campaign  targeting the personal information of citizens in  the United States and Middle East and striving  
to establish a foothold, escalate privileges, and  conduct reconnaissance in support of future  operations.50
to cyberspace to suppress dissidents and undermine dem ocratic institutions around the world. These operations  harass activists at home and abroad.51 Like Russia, Iran  even extends its cyber-enabled political warfare campaign  to the free media and electoral institutions. Iranian  
12 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
groups have been caught using fake social media accounts  to spread disinformation52 and attempting to hack the  2020 U.S. presidential campaigns.53 
North Korea views cyber operations as a tool of coercion  and source of illicit financing via cyber criminal activ ities. North Korean front companies operating abroad  provide opportunities for North Korea to expand the  scope and reach of its operations, despite the limited  connectivity at home.54 From these safe havens, North  Korean cyber operators probe the networks of the  United States and its allies, seeking to steal military  plans, technology, and weapon system information  while identifying vulnerabilities in critical infrastructure  for Pyongyang to exploit in a future crisis.55 When dis sidents or foreign companies oppose the regime, North  Korean operators retaliate online.56 
Major Cyber Operations Publicly Attributed  to North Korea: 2014–2019 
• 2014: North Korea conducts destructive  attack against U.S.-based Sony Pictures  
Entertainment.57 
• 2015: North Korean–linked groups use 5,986  phishing emails containing malicious code to  gain access to noncritical systems at a South  Korean nuclear power plant.58 
• 2016: North Korean groups are linked to  an estimated $81 million cyber heist of  
Bangladesh’s central bank account at the Federal  Reserve Bank of New York.59 
• 2017: North Korea launches the WannaCry  ransomware attack that infects over 300,000  computers in 150 countries; its effects include  temporarily knocking some U.K. hospitals  
offline.60 
• 2019: A UN report concludes that North Korea  used cyberattacks against financial institutions  and cryptocurrency exchanges to steal an  
estimated $2 billion it used to fund its weapons  of mass destruction program.61 
THE CHALLENGE 
The regime extracts illicit gains from the modern global  economy by conducting attacks against systems critical  to financial institutions’ wire transfers.62 These operations  give North Korean leadership a funding lifeline in the face  of otherwise crippling economic sanctions.63 Left unchal lenged, North Korea will only grow bolder, complicating  diplomatic efforts to check its nuclear ambitions. 
Without a new U.S. strategic approach, revisionist  regional powers will seek new opportunities to use  increasingly powerful yet inexpensive cyber operations  to undermine U.S. economic, diplomatic, and military  power. They will challenge the U.S.-led system of alli ances designed to limit major wars and use the resulting  chaos to ensure the safety of corrupt elites.  
Non-state Cyber Threats  
Though we are in an era of great power competition, one  need not be a great power to have a great impact in the  cyber domain. Cyber capabilities, unlike nuclear capabil ities, can be built or obtained without access to national  resources and power. From extremist groups to criminals  and illicit businesses, new threat actors take advantage of  modern connectivity to undermine the integrity of open  societies. Sophisticated criminal enterprise and cybercrime  groups now target some of the world’s largest businesses  and municipalities, stealing money and encrypting critical  data for ransom.64 Internet-enabled social connectivity  provides extremist groups new ways of conducting targeted  recruitment unimaginable just a generation ago. The  so-called Islamic State is an omen of 21st-century terror  movements. The group has demonstrated a sophisticated  understanding of how mobile applications, web content,  and online forums can be used to support operations.65 
The growing demand for cyber capabilities to spy on and  coerce rivals has created entirely new types of businesses  and marketplaces for state and non-state actors.66 Former  cyber operators from multiple countries can sell their skills  to the highest bidder.67 Left unchecked, these actors could  turn the connectivity our world relies on into a chaotic,  fragmented space where states, businesses, and individuals  lose trust and confidence in formal institutions.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 13 
THE CHALLENGE 
Increasingly, cybercriminals are migrating toward the  
Major Cyber Operations Publicly Attributed  to Non-state Actors: 2011–2019 
• 2011–present: Cybercrime group Evil Corp  uses Dridex malware to infect computers and  harvest credentials from banks and financial  institutions in over 40 countries, causing more  than $100 million in theft.68 
• 2011: The GameOver Zeus malware, cre ated by the Russian cybercriminal Evgeniy  Mikhailovich Bogachev, infects more than 1  million devices worldwide and causes damages  in excess of $100 million.69 
• 2013: Cryptolocker ransomware infects more  than 234,000 computers and actors obtain  more than $27 million in ransom payments.70 
• 2014: Four hackers breach the servers of  JPMorgan Chase, compromising the data of  76 million households and 7 million small  businesses in one of the biggest data breaches in  history.71 
• 2015: Members of the Islamist hacker group the  Cyber Caliphate gain control of U.S. Central  Command’s Twitter and YouTube accounts and  post numerous propaganda videos.72 
• 2015: GozNym malware is used by a transna tional organized cybercrime network to steal  an estimated $100 million from unsuspecting  victims in the United States and around the  world.73 
• 2016: Self-declared affiliates of the groups  Anonymous and New World Hackers disrupt  internet service across North America using  a botnet composed of numerous Internet of  Things (IoT) devices.74 
• 2018: After a sophisticated ransomware attack  shut down several critical municipal websites,  the city of Atlanta declines to pay a $52,000  ransom demanded by hackers, instead opting to  spend $2.6 million to rebuild its systems.75 
• 2019: More than 20 Texas towns and the city  of Baltimore are hit with ransomware attacks,  disrupting critical municipal services.76
“crime-as-a-service” model in which threat groups  purchase and exchange malicious code on the dark web.77 Businesses across the globe could lose $5.2 trillion to  these criminal enterprises by 2024.78 In addition, crim inals can use cyber operations to target state and local  government through ransomware attacks. Many of these  thefts are masked through techniques that make attribu tion and prosecution difficult. 
Criminal groups are expanding their cyber operations.  Ransomware attacks are on the rise and increasing in  sophistication. In 2019, ransomware incidents grew over  300 percent compared to 2018.79 The onslaught was so  severe that the Federal Bureau of Investigation released a  public service announcement warning of the risks of tar geted attacks against “health care organizations, industrial  companies, and the transportation sector.”80 These attacks  target not just businesses and individuals, but increasingly  American cities. In 2019 ransomware attacks hit more  than 40 municipalities across the United States.81 
WHERE ARE WE NOW? 
The United States is struggling to address the changing  character of cyber threats. The government still lacks clear,  coordinated response mechanisms that build security into  the cyber ecosystem and deter attacks of significant conse quence. The public and private sectors struggle to coor dinate cyber defenses, leaving gaps that decrease national  resilience and create systemic risk. New technology contin ues to emerge that further compounds these challenges. 
Unclear Strategy  
The United States lacks a clear, comprehensive, publicly  declared doctrine that incorporates all of the instruments  of power to address less-than-catastrophic attacks on  public and private networks in cyberspace. Despite  U.S. progress in shifting to a more aggressive posture in  cyberspace, adversarial states and non-state actors find  cyber operations ideal low-cost, high-payoff methods  for eroding U.S. power that do not risk direct counter attacks. To date, the United States has not sufficiently  changed the cost-benefit calculus made by adversaries  
14 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
Issues Americans Perceive as a Major Threat 80 
THE CHALLENGE 
bureaucracy and a labyrinth  of outdated rules, laws,  and regulations that limit  
t 
n
e
c
r
e
P
70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 
48%44% 
74% 
59%62%58% 
50% 
America’s ability to defend  cyberspace. While the U.S.  government has taken a  more proactive role over the  past four years and started  to use multiple instruments  of power to respond to  threats, these responses still  fall short. Technological  change is outpacing the  U.S. government’s ability  
China’s  
power and  in uence 
Condition of the 
global 
economy 
Cyber  
attacks  
from other  countries 
Global  climate  change 
ISIS North  Korea’s  
nuclear  
program 
Russia’s power  
and  
in uence 
to adapt. Innumerable  barriers to private- and  public-sector collaboration  
“______ is a major threat to our country” 
Source: Pew Research Center, Spring 2018 Global Attitudes Survey
compound the problem.  With each new innovation,  the legacy structures and  approaches amended by the  
when determining whether or not to attack in cyberspace  below the level of armed conflict. 
Just as cost-benefit analysis highlights the ease of cyber  operations, the balance of risk is similarly skewed.  Adversaries suspect that the U.S. government would retal iate for turning off the power in a major city but doubt  American resolve to respond to intellectual property theft,  the implanting of malware in critical infrastructure, and  election interference. They know they can achieve their  objectives on the cheap. Both state and non-state actors  know that in the current environment, new vulnerabilities  that they can exploit emerge every day across the private  sector while government and private-sector responses will  be uncoordinated and sporadic at best.  
Poorly Positioned to Lead  
The U.S. government is currently poorly positioned  to act with the speed and agility required to secure its  interests in cyberspace. The nation that brought the dig ital era into being is weighed down by an industrial-era  
federal government to govern cyberspace become less and  less relevant to the growing range of activities that take  place there.  
This growing irrelevance is partly a result of the character  of innovation and of cyberspace technologies. In previous  eras, the federal government was a significant driver of  technological advancement—including the develop ment of the internet—through its national laboratories,  funding of scientific research, and defense-driven research  initiatives.82 Over time, as technological innovation began  to overtake manufacturing and resource extraction as  the primary means of generating corporate advantage,  the private sector began to outspend the government in  cutting-edge research.  
As the U.S. government sought to manage how tech nology shaped society, it developed a wide range of  programs. From congressional oversight bodies to new  departments, the government expanded. Many of these  new efforts have had significant impact (e.g., U.S.  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 15 
THE CHALLENGE 
Cyber Command, the National Cyber Investigative  Joint Task Force, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure  Security Agency), but the overall federal effort has failed  to comprehensively address the inherent vulnerabilities  associated with increased connectivity. There is still not  a clear unity of effort or theory of victory driving the  federal government’s approach to protecting and securing  cyberspace. 
To make matters worse, the U.S. government lacks the  number of cyber professionals needed to secure its own  networks, much less support private-sector partners or  
treaty allies, who also operate cyber systems that the U.S.  government relies on. There are over 33,000 unfilled  cybersecurity positions in the U.S. government and  500,000 unfilled positions throughout the United States.83 Moreover, a 2015 survey of information technology  executives from the United States, United Kingdom, Israel,  Germany, France, Japan, Australia, and Mexico found that  76 percent of respondents believed that their governments  are not investing enough money in cybersecurity talent.84 The military services are adapting to recruit and train their  
own cyber warriors, but they anticipate difficulties recruit ing and retaining sufficient top-flight talent.85 
Uncoordinated Public and Private Sectors  Because the majority of the critical infrastructure, hardware,  and software that powers the information age resides in  the private sector, there is a unique requirement to build a  public-private partnership to protect the nation. However,  businesses are often reluctant to let governments onto  private, commercial networks without a clear understand ing of their shared interests and responsibilities. Afraid of  creating moral hazard, the federal government invests little  in protecting the cybersecurity of commercial infrastructure  or key systems controlled by states and local municipalities.  
This lack of accountability for managing risk leads to  blind spots. Who is responsible for setting priorities (and  providing funding) when it is necessary to “turn the lights  back on” following a major cyberattack? Who coordinates  continuity of the economy during a series of large-scale  attacks on American financial institutions and transporta tion infrastructure? How do local hospitals, water  
How Can Artificial intelligence and Machine Learning Affect Cybersecurity? 
Advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning (AI/ML) are creating both opportunities and challenges in cyberspace.  On the one hand, these technologies can increase cybersecurity. For example, the Defense Advanced Research Projects  Agency (DARPA) tested AI/ML capabilities during its 2016 Cyber Grand Challenge pitting teams of supercomputers hunting  vulnerabilities against one another.86 Competitors relied on supercomputers to write self-healing code to rapidly search for  flaws and write corrections in real time. Each supercomputer sought to protect itself while searching for and exploiting gaps in  the other competitors. The competition illustrated that an AI/ML-enabled cyber defense was able to detect, and even repair,  vulnerabilities significantly more quickly than humans alone ever could. 
On the other hand, AI/ML risks creating a new arms race. China is aggressively investing in AI/ML applications with military,  domestic surveillance, and economic implications.87 Other countries, such as Russia, and even violent extremist organizations  are exploring how to adapt free and widely available AI/ML algorithms to attack U.S. interests.88 
As a result, the United States must ensure that its research and development investments in AI/ML and other possible  breakthrough technologies match those technologies’ potential consequences for national security. The National Security  Commission on Artificial Intelligence is doing critical research to inform this competition, but this much is already clear: in the  future cyberspace environment, the advantage will not necessarily go to the most powerful among nations, but to the actors  that field the best algorithms or technologies.
16 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
treatment facilities, and municipal offices ask the federal  government for assistance during a sustained ransomware  campaign? Who is responsible for establishing the min imum-security standards, providing vulnerability assess ments, and proactively managing the funding processes  required to prepare for and prevent major cyber inci dents? How can the public and private sectors collaborate  to create a joined picture of the threat landscape? 
As a result, everyone is left to independently balance risk,  make investments, and take ad hoc responsibility for  increasingly vulnerable networks, thereby producing dan gerous security gaps. Public- and private-sector responses  are left uncoordinated and the nation’s critical infrastruc ture is left unprotected and vulnerable to adversaries who  can, and will, exploit this opportunity. 
WHERE ARE WE HEADED? 
Two trends are fundamentally reshaping cyberspace:  (1) increasing connectivity and (2) new technology that  helps users make sense of—and derive value from—vast  quantities of data. These trends can be harnessed with equal  ease by state and non-state actors.  
The speed and accessibility of digital connectivity only  continue to improve. When the first smartphone was  released, mobile internet speeds barely supported the  transmission of images. Today, high-definition video  streaming, real-time GPS tracking, and wirelessly  accessible cloud computing have launched new economic  sectors. Fifth-generation (5G) mobile networking is  poised to further advance this trend toward faster and  more reliable telecommunications. Satellite-based mesh  communications networks—with nodes connected  directly to each other rather than through a hierarchy— will bring the internet to every point on the globe.  
Together, these advancements will enable the massive  deployment of smart sensors—an Internet of Things— that autonomously gather, analyze, and act on data  underpinning almost every facet of human life. Advanced  approaches to connectivity promise global internet  
THE CHALLENGE 
coverage free of constraints imposed by traditional geog raphy, infrastructure, or even governments.  
Driven by miniaturization and 5G networks, the  so-called Internet of Things will create new networks of  communication, data collection, and autonomous action  connecting medical devices, streetlights, cars, sensors,  and even common household appliances. These devices  will allow the internet of our future access to new sources  of vast amounts of information, from the personal (e.g.,  our sleeping habits, dietary patterns, or exercise routines)  to the logistic (e.g., micropatterns in traffic or granular  weather information). As the private lives of citizens  become further enmeshed within networks, new vulnera bilities will be created. 
Authoritarian states will take advantage of preferred  relationships with technology firms to build in backdoors  for government access that allow them to surveil the  private lives of citizens and political opponents at home  and abroad. In addition to advertising, propaganda will  be micro-targeted and tailored to an individual based on  personal data and search history. As networks connect  individuals to transportation and electrical grids, public  works, telecommunications, and the financial system,  new vulnerabilities will become available for adversaries  to exploit. Botnets could hijack billions of devices to  disrupt entire regions, creating new national security  challenges. 
A connected world is also prone to cyber weapons spilling  into the wild. Such spillage, associated with both great  power competition and a black market for malware,  creates new risk vectors. As states spy on each other, they  release malware into the wild that can be repurposed to  attack commercial interests, support authoritarian domes tic spying campaigns, and compromise individual privacy.  Research and development by non-state cyber weapon  developers accelerate this trend, adding new vulnera bilities. While it might be difficult to buy sophisticated  kinetic weapons on the black market, for both states and  criminal groups it is easy to buy malware to support 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 17 
THE CHALLENGE 
Are We Losing the International Standards Race? 
At its inception, advocates proclaimed that cyberspace was a force for good, inherently promoting freedom and democracy.  They heralded the growing presence in China of the internet—a free and open medium invented and dominated by American  entities—as proof that political and economic liberalization would be just around the corner.89 Today, technical and inter national initiatives by countries like China and Russia have made it clear that digital connectivity—and the power it affords  to selectively target, amplify, or isolate audiences ranging in size from one to billions—is a tool, like any other, that can be  wielded for good or bad.  
Because the networks that connect us all in cyberspace eclipse nation-state geographical boundaries and sovereignty, they  create unique challenges for governance. No single nation-state can standardize cyberspace. As a result, standards are  developed by decentralized international bodies primarily driven by academia and the private sector. Even when such bodies  include nation-state representation, like the International Telecommunications Union (ITU), the United States tends to encour age a bottom-up, private-sector-driven process, while China and Russia send full diplomatic delegations and take a more  active role in these bodies.90 
This dynamic is at play in the rollout of 5G networks. In 2013, the Chinese government committed resources and attention  across three ministries to actively coordinate with industry on early 5G development standards.91 This effort was combined  with state support of companies like Huawei to speed research and development toward early patents, which can often  inform the foundations of subsequent technical standards. As a result, by early 2019, Huawei led the world with 1,529 of these  “standards-essential patents” for 5G technology.92 In addition, China has invested in international standards-making bodies,  frequently sending large delegations to working meetings and paying bonuses to their representatives who secure leadership  positions.93 
As Chinese technologies increasingly inform international technical standards, so do the values and policies accompanying  Beijing’s vision for the use of those technologies. China is exporting these technologies around the world, particularly to Africa  and Southeast Asia, where too often invasive surveillance regimes and repressive censorship laws soon follow.94 As China  helps design and deploy the foundational infrastructure over which the world’s data flows, it is ensuring that the same level  of authoritarian control is available to those governments that wish to purchase it. While the United States and its partners  champion a nascent framework for “secure-by-design” standards, including mandatory cybersecurity measures and open,  auditable, and interoperable telecommunications equipment, China is writing a digital future of proprietary technologies in  which “surveillance by design” can too easily become the default.  
The global standards governing the connectivity of cyberspace and its enabling technologies are too important to be left  to authoritarian nation-states that do not value open, free expression or democratic institutions. For the internet to fulfill its  original promise, the United States and its network of democratic allies must engage with standards-making bodies and have  well-researched agendas informed by a clear-eyed understanding of both technological and geopolitical trends. While the  original vision for the internet and digital connectivity is an attractive one, the U.S. government is now only one of many actors  defining the rules for cyberspace. The United States must collaborate with its partners—both government and private-sector  entities—to ensure that our most critical technologies are designed using standards that align with American values.
18 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
brazen cyberattacks. Because cyber weapons are not in the  exclusive control of nation-states, traditional arms control  methods are difficult to coordinate, much less enforce. 
AN INFLECTION POINT 
The United States thus stands at a strategic inflection  point. While America looks forward to the potential of  cyberspace and associated technologies to improve the  quality of human life, threats continue to grow at an  accelerating pace. America is facing adversary nation states, extremists, and criminals that are leveraging  emerging technologies to an unprecedented degree.  Authoritarian states seek to control every aspect of life  in their societies and export this style of government,  in which surveillance trumps liberty, to the rest of the  world. There is no public square, only black boxes prolif erating propaganda and organizing economic activity to  benefit the few at the expense of the many. Rogue states,  extremists, and criminals thrive on the dark web, taking  advantage of insecure network connections and a market  for malware to prey on victims. 
In a world where the United States fails to check the  spread of surveillance technologies beloved by dicta tors and fails to champion a new strategy to secure the  connectivity on which societies around the world rely,  democracy withers. Chinese technology exports could  help Beijing censor topics that it, or despot clients,  deems taboo, and the free world would have no way of  knowing the facts. The security of global networks would  be corrupted from the inside out, handing the Chinese  Communist Party compromising personal information  on people around the world. At the same time, China,  Russia, Iran, and North Korea will use cyber operations  to interfere with elections in free countries, bringing  the legitimacy of the democratic process into question.  These nations, along with extremist groups, will further  weaponize social media, distorting public discourse and  deepening polarization in societies around the world. The  world is on the brink of a second information revolution.  
THE CHALLENGE 
If democracies do not devise a new strategy to provide  confidentiality, integrity, and availability of information  in cyberspace, they are unlikely to be the leading benefi ciaries or guarantors of this new, connected world.  
Technological trends are creating markets and practices  that challenge the U.S. government’s ability to provide  the stability required for freedom and prosperity to  flourish. Today, the private sector is the hub for tech nological innovation, with the government at times  struggling to import that innovation back into its own  systems and processes.95 This shift is further magnified  by private-sector ownership of most of the physical  and logical layers of cyberspace.96 The result is an  unprecedented reversal of dependencies: while the U.S.  government has traditionally provided for the collective  defense, it now requires enhanced cooperation and  partnership with the private sector.  
Across American history, the Republic has weathered  large-scale change and strategic inflections by forging new  strategies and partnerships. Democracies adapt, powered  by open debate and an ability to build bridges between  the public and private sectors that take advantage of new  opportunities and mitigate emergent risks. The opportu nities and vulnerabilities associated with growing con nectivity and the reach of cyberspace into all of our lives  is no different. The United States needs a new strategic  posture to defend its interest in cyberspace. Because  the domain relies disproportionately on private-sector  networks, this strategy must incentivize public- and pri vate-sector collaboration and deny adversaries the ability  to hold America hostage in cyberspace. This strategy  must combine non-military instruments of power with  defensive mechanisms to secure critical infrastructure— backed by a credible capability and capacity to impose  costs through cyber and non-cyber military operations at  time and place of the nation’s choosing—both to shape  competition beneath the level of armed conflict and to  win in armed conflict. 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 19 
HISTORICAL LEGACY AND  METHODOLOGY 
HISTORICAL LEGACY 
The Cyberspace Solarium Commission draws its inspi ration from President Dwight D. Eisenhower’s 1953  Project Solarium.97 With the Soviet Union looming as an  existential threat, Eisenhower tasked his national security  team with designing a long-term competitive strategy  that would outlast his presidency.98 Project Solarium  pitted three teams, each developing a different strategic  framework, against each other over the course of six  weeks working at the National War College and a day long debate at the White House. Their work eventually  culminated in NSC 162/2—Eisenhower’s “New Look”  grand strategy—a sustainable variant of containment that  laid the foundation for success against the Soviet Union.99 This whole-of-nation strategy called upon the talents of  citizens, corporations, academia, and government alike.100 The United States’ extended competition with the Soviet  Union would yield, among other things, arguably the  most consequential technological innovation of the  postwar period: the internet.101 
Similar to the original Solarium effort, the world is  now living through a period of strategic adjustment.  The United States is struggling to defend its interests  in cyberspace and leverage its comparative advantages:  technological prowess, an innovative workforce, an open  society, and a free market. For the past 25 years, each  presidential administration has reached out to academ ics, business leaders, and innovators to develop new  ideas to solve this problem but has consistently fallen  short. There are enduring challenges at the heart of  securing American interests in cyberspace. In the early  1960s, computer scientists and national security experts  began to identify the inherent vulnerabilities and threats  associated with the increasing connectivity afforded by  computers. At the RAND Corporation, Willis Ware  began to conceptualize a gathering threat unique to  emerging computer networks.102 While his colleague  
Paul Baran argued that the decentralization of computer  systems would reduce the risk of destruction or dis ruption, Ware worried that decentralization would also  increase the risk of error and intrusion.103 Recognizing  that the advance of computer networking—particularly  in service of national security—was unstoppable, Ware  set about creating a theory of security in the cyber  domain. In 1970, working at the behest of the Defense  Science Board, Ware published “Security Controls for  Computer Systems,” later known as the “Ware Report.”  This analysis took a holistic view of network security,  arguing that information must be secured through a  comprehensive set of “hardware, software, communica tion, physical, personnel, and administrative-procedural  safeguards.”104 Many of the vulnerabilities foreseen by  the Ware Report—including user and administrator  errors, insider subversion, weak authentication, and  persistent threats—remain fundamental concerns in  cybersecurity 50 years later.  
The concept of cybersecurity (if not yet the word itself)  entered American pop culture in 1983 with the release  of the film WarGames, a production on which Ware  consulted.105 The buzz surrounding the film, which fea tures a teenager hacking into national defense systems  and nearly causing a nuclear exchange with the Soviet  Union, caught the attention of the Reagan administra tion. After a private viewing of the film at Camp David,  President Ronald Reagan tasked his national security  team with determining the real-world plausibility of  such an incident.106 In 1984, President Reagan signed  National Security Decision Directive 145, “National  Policy on Telecommunications and Automated  Information Systems Security.”107 NSDD-145 would be  the first in a long line of presidential directives, con gressional bills, commissions, and national strategies all  aimed at protecting the United States from the hazards  of its revolutionary creation. 
20 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
There have been some successes in organizing the nation  for resilience. Since 1997, the U.S. government has estab lished numerous cybersecurity and critical infrastructure  
commissions that have each released noteworthy plans  for improvement,108 and the federal government has also  stood up new organizations to coordinate policies and  operations in cyberspace such as the National Cyber  Investigative Joint Task Force in 2008, U.S. Cyber  Command in 2009, the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure  Security Agency in 2018, and the National Security  Agency’s new Cybersecurity Directorate, created in  2019.109 Cyberspace commissions, reports, and directives  have helped shape laws such as the 1986 Computer  Fraud and Abuse Act, the 1999 Financial Services  Modernization Act, the 2002 Federal Information  Security Management Act, and the 2015 Cybersecurity  Information Sharing Act.110 
Yet despite these efforts, new threats and vulnerabilities  appear daily for many of the same reasons highlighted  by the Ware Report. This phenomenon has not been  lost on previous reports and commissions. In 1996, the  Defense Science Board’s Information Warfare-Defense  report noted with apparent frustration that it was “the  third consecutive year a DSB Summer Study or Task  Force [had] made similar recommendations.” The 2009  Cyberspace Policy Review echoed many of the same  recommendations offered by similar strategic reviews in  the 1990s and in 2003.111 There are many more examples  of such efforts from the past 50 years that produced  overwhelming expert consensus but limited policy action.  This effort seeks to avoid this fate by developing both a  coherent strategy for securing cyberspace and concrete  policy recommendations the executive branch and  Congress can act on without delay. 
METHODOLOGY 
The Cyberspace Solarium Commission used a mul timethod approach combining interviews with  subject matter experts, red teaming, stress tests,  and quantitative analysis to develop a strategy for  defending American interests. Like the original  
HISTORICAL LEGACY AND METHODOLOGY  
Solarium event—which used strategic concepts such  as containment, rollback, and massive retaliation to  calibrate a strategic approach to competing with the  
Soviet Union—the Cyberspace Solarium Commission  adapted strategic approaches optimized for the complex  connectivity of cyberspace and assigned them to its  three Task Forces. Each Task Force used one of these  approaches—active disruption and cost imposition,  denial and defense, and entanglement through norms based regimes that encourage responsible behavior in  cyberspace112—to articulate key lines of effort, or pillars,  paired with key recommendations. 
First, each Task Force conducted independent research.  This research focused on interviewing subject matter  experts from government, academia, and industry in  more than 300 sessions over five months, as well as  conducting a literature review. These sessions enabled  the Task Forces to build a collaborative research network  to test emerging ideas and existing approaches to secur ing cyberspace. Attendees at these meetings included  full-time staff, part-time subject matter experts, and  Commissioners themselves.  
Task Force Engagements 
• 200+ meetings with industry experts  
• 25+ meetings with academics 
• 50+ meetings with federal, state, and local  officials 
• 10+ seminars/roundtables hosted by think tanks • 20+ meetings with officials from international  organizations/foreign countries 
The research phase produced independent task force  reports outlining alternative strategies and policy  approaches for securing America’s vital networks in cyber space. Each Task Force had a different theory of victory,  independently describing the core challenge to securing  cyberspace and how best to apply instruments of national  power to defend American interests.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 21 
HISTORICAL LEGACY AND METHODOLOGY  
Second, the Task Forces    
turned to a series of red  
teams to assess their strate 
gies. As external, indepen 
dent groups, the red teams  
challenged the theories of  
victory and key recommen 
dations, providing both  
verbal and written feedback  
to each Task Force. This  
feedback was then used by  
the teams to fine-tune each  
approach and supporting  
) 
n
o
i
s
s
recommendations.  
i
m
m
o
C
 
Third, the Commission  
m
u
i
r
a
l
stress-tested each Task  
o
S
 
e
c
Force strategic approach.  
a
p
s
r
e
As was done during the  
b
y
C
 
.
original Eisenhower  
S
.
U
(
Solarium project, an  event was held at Fort  McNair in partnership  with the National Defense  University.113 Unlike the  original Solarium event,  
Senator Angus King asks a question at the Commission’s Solarium event, hosted by  the National Defense University on October 25, 2019, while fellow Commissioners  Representative Mike Gallagher and FBI Director Christopher Wray look on.
the 2019 forum adapted key concepts from stress tests  and red team techniques to help the Commissioners  evaluate the inherent strengths and weaknesses of  each approach. The stress tests used complex scenarios  involving the widespread use of cyber operations against  a hypothetical country and its allies.114 These attacks  targeted a complex mix of political institutions, military  forces, the Defense Industrial Base, and economic targets  ranging from financial institutions to critical infra structure. During the Solarium event, each Task Force  responded to questions from Commissioners and red  team members on how their strategy would address the  crises outlined in the scenarios. 
Fourth, following the Solarium event, the Commissioners  assessed each strategy and its supporting policy recom mendations, providing formal feedback. The staff tabu lated this feedback and used the insights and guidance  gained to further refine the recommendations.  
Unlike the original Solarium, this was not a top-secret  process driven by the President. Instead, it was an open  process created by Congress in collaboration with the  executive branch. This process enabled the Commission  to evaluate competing perspectives and recommend a  strategy that defines the core objectives and priorities  required to secure American interests in cyberspace. 
22 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
STRATEGIC APPROACH:  LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
Since 1960, pockets of scientists, military officers,  
academics, technology innovators, and government  officials have all wrestled with a dilemma: as connectivity  expands, it creates both increasing opportunities and  greater vulnerabilities. Every new device connected, and  line of code added, presents adversaries with new attack  surfaces they can use to undermine American security  and prosperity. These devices and applications, as well as  the communications infrastructure on which they rely,  are overwhelmingly controlled by the private sector.115 To  defend cyberspace thus requires significant coordination  across the public and private sectors.  
In this dilemma reside the seeds of a new strategy:  layered cyber deterrence. Layered cyber deterrence com bines a number of traditional deterrence mechanisms  and extends them beyond the government to develop  a whole-of-nation approach. Since America relies on  critical infrastructure that is primarily owned and  operated by the private sector, the government cannot  defend the nation alone. The public and private sectors,  along with key international partners, must collaborate to  build national resilience and reshape the cyber ecosystem  in a manner that increases its security, while imposing  costs against malicious actors and preventing attacks of  significant consequence. 
others and the more resilient its infrastructure, the more  powerful it becomes. This power requires secure connec tions and stable expectations between leading states about  what is and is not acceptable behavior in cyberspace. It  requires shaping adversary behavior not just by threat ening costs but also by changing the ecosystem in which  competition occurs. It requires international engagement  and collaborating with the private sector. 
Second, layered cyber deterrence emphasizes working  with the private sector to efficiently coordinate how  the nation responds with speed and agility to emerging  threats. The federal government alone cannot fund or  solve the challenge of adversaries attacking the networks  on which America and its allies and partners rely. It  requires collaboration with state and local authorities,  leading business sectors, and international partners, all  within the rule of law established by the Constitution  that protects the rights of individuals. This strategy also  contemplates the planning needed to ensure the continu ity of the economy and the ability of the United States to  
Whole-of-Nation FrameworkrkInteg
First, the approach combines traditional methods of  altering the cost-benefit calculus of adversaries (e.g.,  denial and cost imposition) with forms of influence opti mized for a connected era, such as promoting norms that  encourage restraint and incentivize responsible behavior  in cyberspace. Strategic discussions all too often prioritize  narrow definitions of deterrence that fail to consider  how technology is changing society. In a connected  world, those states that harness the power of cooperative,  networked relationships gain a position of advantage and  inherent leverage.116 The more connected a state is to  
o
etw
artner N
nal P
Internatio
Govern ment 
Private Sector 
Citizens 
rate A
ll Instrum
ents o
f P
o
w
er 
Whole-of-Nation Framework 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 23 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
rebound in the aftermath of a major, nationwide cyber attack of significant consequence. Such planning adds  depth to deterrence by assuring the American people,  allies, and even our adversaries that the United States will  have both the will and capability to respond to an attack  on its interests, no matter how devastating.  
Third, the strategy builds on the defend forward concept,  originally articulated in the Department of Defense  (DoD) Cyber Strategy, to include all of the instruments  of national power. It integrates defend forward into a  whole-of-nation approach for securing American interests  in cyberspace. Defend forward is a proactive, rather than  reactive, approach to adversary cyber threats. Specifically,  it addresses the fact that the United States has not created  credible and sufficient costs against malicious adversary  behavior below the level of armed attack—even as the  United States has prevented cyberattacks of significant  consequences.117 Therefore, defend forward posits that  the United States must shift from responding to mali cious behavior after it has already occurred to proactively  observing, pursuing, and countering adversary operations  and imposing costs to change adversary behavior. By  shaping the strategic environment and creating mean ingful costs for malicious behavior, defend forward aims  to disrupt and defeat ongoing malicious adversary cyber  campaigns, deter future campaigns, and reinforce favor able international norms of behavior. This posture implies  persistent engagement118 with adversaries as part of an  overall integrated effort to apply every authority, access,  and capability possible (e.g., laws, financial regulation,  diplomacy, education) to the defense of cyberspace in a  manner consistent with international law.  
Layered cyber deterrence combines different ways to  shape adversaries’ decision making. The central idea is  simple: increase the costs and decrease the benefits that  adversaries anticipate when planning cyberattacks  against American interests. This can be achieved by  employing multiple deterrent mechanisms concurrently,  continuously, and collaboratively across the public and  private sectors. If deterrence fails, the United States  
retains a multitude of options that comply with interna tional law.  
In the first layer, the United States together with our  partners and allies collectively develops and implements  cyber norms based on our shared interests and values.  These norms have the potential to shape behavior, largely  by encouraging restraint and incentivizing responsible  behavior. Actions in this layer include, but are not  limited to, diplomacy, law enforcement cooperation, and  intelligence sharing on emerging and persistent threat  vectors and vulnerabilities. Over time, growing coalitions  of like-minded partners and allies can limit the number  of targets that adversaries can attack through capacity  building and can increase the costs of malign behavior  through collective action. This approach will not elim inate state-sponsored cyber operations or cybercrime,  but consistently enforced consequences and rewards can  begin to erode the incentives for bad behavior.  
In the second layer, the U.S. government collaborates  with the private sector to reduce vulnerabilities and  deny benefits to adversaries. The strategy for this layer of  deterrence is to force adversaries to make difficult choices  regarding resources, access, and capabilities. When U.S.  vulnerabilities are reduced and adversaries are forced to  expend more resources, burn sensitive accesses, or utilize  unique and expensive cyber weapons to achieve their  desired results, cyberattacks will be reduced. Actions  in this layer include, but are not limited to, expanding  operational collaboration between government and  private sector, prioritizing support to systemically import ant critical infrastructure, exercising local authorities  and the private sector’s ability to respond to significant  cyberattacks through such mechanisms as Continuity  of the Economy (COTE) planning, pooling public and  private data on cyber intrusions, incentivizing compa nies and individuals to reduce systemic vulnerabilities,  and ensuring that the intelligence resources of the U.S.  government are effectively brought to bear in supporting  the private sector’s own cybersecurity efforts.119 Over  time, these activities make it harder for adversaries to find 
24 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
easy attack vectors and hold at risk American networks in  cyberspace. The U.S. government must find ways to col laborate with private-sector vendors and state as well as  local governments to use red teams to anticipate possible  cyberattacks against critical infrastructure. In the worst case scenario of a major, nationwide cyberattack, properly  exercised COTE plans will help ensure the reconstitution  of the country’s critical economic drivers. 
In the third layer, the United States is prepared to  impose costs to deter conflict, limit malicious adversary  behavior below the level of armed conflict, and, if neces sary, prevail in war by employing the full spectrum of its  capabilities. Deterrence must extend to limiting attacks  on the U.S. election system and preventing large scale intellectual property theft. To that end, the U.S.  government must demonstrate its ability to impose costs  using all instruments of power, while establishing a clear  
declaratory policy that signals to rival states the costs  and risks associated with attacking America in cyber space. Defend forward is an important part of the cost  imposition layer. The original defend forward concept  put forth by DoD focuses on the military instrument  of power to impose costs to “disrupt or halt malicious  cyber activity at its source, including activity that falls  below the level of armed conflict.”120 Reimagined as a  key element of layered cyber deterrence, defend forward  in this context comprises the proactive and integrated  employment of all of the instruments of power. Defend  forward requires the United States to have the capability  and capacity for sustained engagement in cyberspace to  impose costs on adversaries for engaging in malicious  cyber activity. The cost imposition layer also demands  that the U.S. government protect its ability to respond  with military force at a time and place of its choosing.  A key aspect of this ability is ensuring the security and  
Layered Cyber Deterrence
Defend Forward 
concurrent, continuous, collaborative 
Deterrent Layer (Mechanism) 
Layer 1:  
Shape Behavior 
(entanglement/norms) 
Layer 2:  
Deny Benefits  (denial) 
Layer 3:  
Impose Costs (punishment) 
Adversary  Use of Cyber  Operations 
Cybercrime 
IP Theft 
& Defense  
Industrial Base  Exfiltration 
Malign  
Influence Operations 
Significant 
Attack on Critical Infrastructure 
Military  Conflict 
Daily Competition 
Cyber Threat Spectrum 
Conflict 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 25 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
resilience of critical weapons systems and functions in  cyberspace.  
THE STRATEGIC LOGIC OF DETERRENCE Layered cyber deterrence adapts an enduring strategy to  defend American interests in cyberspace.121 Over the past  seven decades, deterrence has been the foundation of  U.S. strategy.122 As a strategic concept for managing great  power competition, deterrence played a pivotal role in U.S.  foreign policy during the Cold War.123 
Scholars define deterrence as “dissuading someone from  doing something by making them believe the costs to  them will exceed their expected benefit.”124The deterrence  literature distinguishes between a number of different  deterrence strategies, including denial, punishment,  entanglement, and normative taboos. These strategies  take on unique attributes in cyberspace. 
Deterrence by punishment, which gained prominence  during the nuclear age, rests on the credible threat to  harm a target’s civilian population or economy, thereby  making the perceived costs of an action unacceptably  high (“countervalue” targeting).125 In cyberspace, deter rence by punishment entails the threat of latent violence  against the non-military assets that a target holds dear.  America’s commitment to international law appropri ately places constraints on its willingness to implement  deterrence by punishment in cyberspace. In addition,  scholars of cyber strategy debate the extent to which  cyber capabilities offer a feasible punishment mechanism,  or whether punishment requires lethal capabilities.126 Therefore, in cyberspace the preferred punishment  strategy for democratic nations is to impose costs on  adversaries through targeting key—often government or  illicit, as opposed to commercial and civilian—networks  and infrastructure used to conduct cyber campaigns.  
Deterrence by denial entails threatening to physically  impede, reduce the impact of, or increase the costs of  an adversary’s ability to successfully attack American  interests.127 Traditionally, this form of deterrence works  
by targeting the adversary’s military capabilities (“coun terforce” targeting) and/or by shoring up one’s own  defenses to such an extent that offensive operations  by the attacking state are perceived to be inordinately  costly.128 In cyberspace, deterrence by denial works by  increasing the costs to the attacker—beyond just financial  costs—of breaching the deterring state’s defenses. When  the government and private sector collaborate to build  security into connected systems, they reduce the number  of vulnerabilities adversaries can exploit. This form of  denial is especially important for deterring non-state  actors, such as extremists and criminals.  
In addition to punishment and denial, deterrence can be  achieved through entanglement and normative taboos.129 Entanglement can deter under conditions of mutual  interdependence, when an attack would create mean ingful costs for the attacker as well as the defender.130 Entanglement implies shared risk. For example, two  states may be interconnected through mutually beneficial  economic relationships.131 In cyberspace, we all rely on  the same networks and underlying infrastructure that  supports global connectivity. Cyber operations threaten  this connectivity and create shared risks. Norms can also  contribute to deterrence by “imposing reputational costs  that can damage an actor’s soft power beyond the value  gained from a given attack.”132 In cyberspace, these repu tational costs can amplify the threat of punishment and  denial-based activities that deter extreme attacks by states,  helping to discourage espionage and subterfuge beneath  the threshold of armed conflict.  
The success of deterrence typically rests on four factors.  First, the deterring state must clearly communicate  the terms of a threat so that the target understands the  behavior expected of it and the potential consequences of  ignoring the threat. Second, the deterrer should ensure  that the threatened costs inflicted on the adversary  outweigh the latter’s perceived benefits from conducting  the undesired action. Third, deterrent threats must be  credible: the deterrer must possess both the capability to  carry out the terms of a threat and the resolve or political 
26 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
will to do so. Importantly, and related to the first point,  the target of deterrence must perceive that costs will  actually be imposed, which means that a deterring state  has to develop mechanisms for signaling credibility to the  target. Finally, deterrent threats should be coupled with  some form of reassurance to the target that if it complies  and does not act, the deterrer will refrain from carrying  out the threatened response.  
These criteria illustrate some of the fundamental chal lenges associated with successfully implementing deter rence in cyberspace. Rather than clearly communicating  an ultimatum to a target, which may tie their hands and  create politically infeasible “red lines,” states may prefer to  retain strategic ambiguity and flexibility. Communication  and signaling could also be complicated by the potential  for misperception. These dynamics are compounded in  cyberspace, where states initially conceal their attacks  and often seek to obscure the source through misattribu tion, false flags, and proxies. For example, challenges in  establishing timely and accurate attribution can weaken  cyber deterrence by generating doubt about the identity  of the perpetrator of a cyberattack and undermining the  credibility of response options.133 
In addition, credibility is a central challenge of deter rence, which is why in his seminal work on the topic,  Arms and Influence, Thomas Schelling devotes consid erable energy to this problem and the various means  by which states could enhance the credibility of their  
threats (e.g., what he calls hand-tying, brinkmanship, or  the art of commitment).134 In the domain of cyberspace,  states must signal credible commitments not just by  making threats but by taking actions that demonstrate  their willingness and ability to respond to cyber threats.  Signaling, which includes statements or actions that  are meant to communicate information to a target,135 is  especially difficult in cyberspace. The target may sim ply not perceive the threatened cyber costs to be high  enough to affect its calculus, or the target may be willing  to gamble—knowing that cyber operations and effects  are often unpredictable and fleeting—that a threatened  
action may not produce the effect intended by the  deterring state.136 Furthermore, cyber signaling about  capability may be ineffective, misinterpreted, or misper ceived.137 Conversely, a deterring state may be loath to  reveal certain cyber capabilities that would enhance the  credibility of deterrence because the act of revealing them  may render them ineffective.138 
Finally, measuring the success of deterrence can be  a trying enterprise, because a positive outcome is  something that does not happen and effects are often  uncertain. Uncertainty surrounding the effects of cyber  capabilities—both anticipating their likely impact in  advance and measuring the actual harm they cause—can  muddle the battle damage assessments that are essential  for any deterrence calculus.139 In the absence of unique  intelligence collection against adversary decision making,  it can be difficult to determine whether a target chose  not to act mainly because the deterrent threat worked  or for unrelated reasons. In cyberspace, this dynamic  implies a need to support operations designed to deter  an adversary with extensive, all-source intelligence about  adversary decision making that can be used to calibrate  the response. Deterrence is more likely to succeed when  situated within the strategic context and refined to focus  on specific types of behavior or specific adversaries, rather  than on cyber activities in general.140 
Deterrence is an enduring American strategy, but it  must be adapted to address how adversaries leverage  new technology and connectivity to attack the United  States. Cyber operations have become a weapon of  choice for adversaries seeking to hold the U.S. economy  and national security at risk.141 Therefore, the concept  of deterrence must evolve to address this new strategic  landscape. Following nearly two decades in which the  U.S. government prioritized counterterrorism and coun terinsurgency, great power competition has resurfaced as  America’s central strategic challenge.142 The United States  now faces emerging peer competitors, particularly as  China and Russia reassert their influence regionally and  globally, often through cyber and influence operations 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 27 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
that undermine American power below the level of  armed conflict.143 Reducing the scope and severity of  these adversary cyber operations and campaigns requires  adopting the strategy of layered cyber deterrence.  
DEFEND FORWARD AND LAYERED CYBER  DETERRENCE 
Layered cyber deterrence places the U.S. Department of  Defense’s concept of defend forward in a larger, whole of-nation framework that uses multiple instruments of  power to secure American networks in cyberspace.144 Since the end of World War II, the United States has used  forward-deployed military forces to advance American  interests. This strategic posture was an integral compo nent of the grand strategy of containment for the United  States and NATO. Cold War forward defense involved  
Why Is Cyberspace an Odd Domain? 
both projecting power by positioning U.S. and allied  forces on the front lines of the potential battlefields of  the next world war, and leveraging multiple instruments  of power. These forward-deployed forces served several  purposes: deterrence and signaling U.S. resolve and  capabilities to the Soviet Union; enabling rapid response  from a more advantageous position if conflict should  break out; a source of intelligence and early warning; and  a form of credible commitment to allies.  
The connectivity and global reach of cyberspace make  forward defense even more essential today. During the  Cold War, the United States could anticipate where the  front lines would likely be. In cyberspace, it is difficult to  anticipate the battlefield or identify clear front lines. As  NotPetya illustrates, cyberattacks often spill beyond their  
Cyberspace is a fundamentally new, novel, and odd domain for human activity. Unlike the traditional (and more  tangible) domains of land, sea, air, and space, cyberspace is entirely human-made and has existed for only a few  decades. Application of the laws, norms, and expectations of the traditional domains—the fundamental “phys ics” that has governed the course of human relations—is challenged by and in cyberspace.  
In the four traditional domains, strategic competition is shaped by governments; cyberspace is shaped primarily  by market forces. Cyberspace exists almost entirely on privately owned and operated information and communi cations technology (ICT) infrastructure, making it at least as much a good or service as a domain. As a domain of  conflict, cyberspace is a “gray zone” where malicious actors get away with acts of theft, disruption, and even war  that would not be permissible in a traditional domain.145 
Outside of cyberspace, hundreds of years of legal tradition and iterative jurisprudence have produced commonly  accepted principles—principles that slowly formed the foundations on which states built their domestic laws  and guided their relations with other nations. Many existing laws still apply in cyberspace, but as technology  continues to evolve, there can be uncertainty about how those laws pertain to this changing landscape, which  is altering the relationship between governments and their citizens.146 As an emerging legal frontier, cyberspace  imposes new and different expectations on the public and private sectors to engage with one another in the  defense of the nation.  
Since the creation of cyberspace, the U.S. government, the private sector, and individual Americans have collec tively struggled to secure it. Its existence defies millennia of human precedents and traditions. Cyberspace is an  odd domain.
28 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
initial targets and infect other networks. This complica tion creates an imperative to defend forward and counter  adversaries’ use of cyber operations.147 
Layered cyber deterrence builds on the original DoD  defend forward concept. First, like the DoD concept, it  operates as a general strategic principle during day-to day competition, in which the U.S. government “will  defend forward to disrupt or halt malicious cyber activity  at its source, including activity that falls below the level  of armed conflict.”148 This posture includes operating  in “gray” and “red” space in a manner consistent with  international law.149 Second, it plays a role in ensuring  that the U.S. government retains the ability to apply all  instruments of power to respond to crisis or conflict.  Applied to military power, this includes ensuring “the  cybersecurity and resilience of DoD, DCI [Defense  Critical Infrastructure], and DIB [Defense Industrial  Base] networks and systems.”150 Finally, cyber layered  deterrence, like defend forward, secures critical infrastruc ture and safeguards American networks by finding ways  “to stop threats before they reach their targets.”151 
Changes to law in the FY2019 National Defense  Authorization Act (NDAA)152 and the issuance of National  Security Presidential Memorandum (NSPM) 13153 enable  the U.S. government to adopt a defend forward posture.  This posture was an integral part of the overall U.S. effort  to counter Russian election interference in the 2018  midterm elections.154 As the Commander of U.S. Cyber  Command, General Paul Nakasone, testified in February  2019, “Working together under my command, U.S. Cyber  Command and the National Security Agency (NSA)  undertook an initiative known as the Russia Small Group  to protect the elections from foreign interference and  influence. By enabling our fellow combatant commands  and other partners, U.S. Cyber Command assisted the  collective intelligence and defense effort that demonstrated  persistent engagement in practice.”155 These initiatives are  continuing as part of the interagency effort to defend the  2020 presidential elections.156 
However, additional improvements to existing law  and policy would further support defend forward and  address some of the challenges that have emerged in the  early phases of its implementation. Most importantly,  defend forward should be integrated at the national  level as part of a U.S. national cyber strategy that  incorporates all of the instruments of power. Including  defend forward as a key element of layered cyber deter rence to counter malicious campaigns below the level  of armed conflict addresses this issue and articulates  how these activities support efforts to shape adversary  behavior, deny benefits, and reinforce norms of respon sible behavior. 
THE IMPLEMENTATION OF LAYERED CYBER  DETERRENCE  
Layered cyber deterrence calls for reconceptualizing  how the U.S. government coordinates cyber policy and  the organizations and authorities aligned to defend  American interests. To date, the U.S. government has  built and operated a number of organizations specifi cally to support this mission set (e.g., the Cybersecurity  and Infrastructure Security Agency, the National  Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force, the Cyber Threat  Intelligence Integration Center, U.S. Cyber Command,  and the National Security Agency’s Cybersecurity  Directorate). Yet the creation of more organizations, con gressional committees, and study groups makes it difficult  to achieve the unity of effort required to conduct layered  cyber deterrence and build the type of systemic resilience  that changes the cost-benefit calculus in cyberspace. As  a result, the United States finds it difficult to collaborate  with the private sector and conduct cyber operations  as part of whole-of-nation campaigns. Despite the new  authorities outlined in the 2019 NDAA and NSPM 13 designed to improve government cyber campaign  planning and to conduct offensive cyber operations,  as well as multiple executive orders on securing critical  infrastructure and promoting information sharing, the  U.S. government is still struggling to secure its interests  in cyberspace. 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 29 
STRATEGIC APPROACH: LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE  
Layered cyber deterrence is the blueprint that the  government and American public need to build bridges  across government agencies, international partners, and  most importantly the private sector in order to secure  American networks in cyberspace. It is the best way for  the government to implement new authorities and take  appropriate proportional action that builds national resil ience as well as disrupts, defeats, and deters active cyber  campaigns, including those targeting critical economic  and political institutions like election systems.157 
To translate layered deterrence into action requires three  lines of effort organized into six pillars and more than 75  supporting recommendations that enhance the ability  of the U.S. government to shape adversary behavior,  deny benefits, and impose costs. Defend forward spans  all three lines of effort to identify, isolate, and counter  threats consistent with existing authorities and legal  frameworks. 
Layered Cyber Deterrence
CURRENT STATE 
	APPROACH 
	PILLARS 
	DESIRED END STATES
	Adversaries are  
conducting cyber  campaigns that tar get U.S. networks  in cyberspace and  threaten American  safety and security,  economic interests,  political institutions,  and ability to proj ect military power.  
The U.S. gov 
ernment has the  authorities but  
lacks the optimal  structure and  
relationships with  the private sector  and other partners  to achieve a unity  of effort at the scale  required to defend  forward.
	Shape  
Behavior
	Foundation: Reform  
the U.S.  
Government  Structure  
and  
Organization  for  
Cyberspace
	Strengthen  
Norms and Non military Tools
	A digital environment that is safe and sta ble, promotes continued innovation and  economic growth, protects personal privacy,  ensures national security, and does so by  building: 
• An international community that observes  and enforces norms of responsible state  behavior 
• Critical elements of national power and  infrastructure that are secure, resilient,  and supported by a defensible digital  ecosystem 
• Public-private partnerships based on a  shared situational awareness, combined  action, and full support of the U.S. govern ment in defense of the private sector 
• An agile, proactive U.S. government  organized to rapidly and concurrently  employ every instrument of national power  in defense of cyberspace and to gener ate deterrent options tailored to each  adversary 
• A cyber force equipped with the resources,  capabilities, and processes to maneuver  and rapidly engage adversaries in and  through cyberspace
	Deny  
Benefits
	Promote National  Resilience 
	Reshape the  
Cyber Ecosystem  toward Greater  Security
	Operationalize  Cybersecurity  
Collaboration  
with the Private  Sector
	Impose  
Costs
	Preserve  
and Employ  
the Military  
Instrument of  
Power
	



30 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S  STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION  FOR CYBERSPACE  
In democratic governance, structure is policy. To achieve  
the outcomes the United States requires to be more  secure and prosperous in cyberspace—the outcomes this  report seeks to realize—the U.S. government must be  structured properly to realize them. Because cyberspace  increasingly pervades every aspect of our government,  economy, and society, however, this is a uniquely chal lenging problem. An effective government for the digital  era means a government that has the right authorities, a  coherent strategy, the critical partnerships, and the best  talent. To realize this modern vision of policy requires a  modern structure of government. 
The U.S. government has taken necessary and signifi cant steps to deter and disrupt threats from cyberspace,  but they nonetheless remain insufficient to the scale of  the problem. Governmental action has too often been  piecemeal and independent of private-sector insights and  interests, too much information remains over-classified  or narrowly distributed, and a lack of strategic coherence  continues to hinder attempts at improving systemic  national cybersecurity.  
The legislative and executive branches must each better  align their authorities and capabilities to produce the  speed and agility of action required to defend America  in cyberspace. There needs to be greater collaboration  between the public and private sectors in the defense  of critical infrastructure and better integration in the  planning, resourcing, and employment of government  cyber resources. The recommendations in this pillar are  intended to provide the U.S. government with the stra tegic continuity and unity of effort necessary to support  the other pillars and recommendations of this report in  achieving layered cyber deterrence and defending U.S.  
critical infrastructure against cyberattacks of significant  consequence.  
First, the executive branch should issue a new national  cyber strategy bringing coherence to the federal gov ernment’s efforts. That strategy should be based on this  Commission’s framework of layered cyber deterrence,  emphasize resilience and public-private collaboration,  build on the Department of Defense’s (DoD) concept of  defend forward as a government-wide effort, and priori tize a bias for action. 
Second, Congress must improve its oversight of cyber security by reorganizing and centralizing its committee  structure and jurisdiction. Responsibility for cybersecurity  is currently dispersed throughout numerous committees  and subcommittees, hamstringing legislative authority,  muddling oversight, and impeding Congress’s ability to act  with the speed and vision necessary for a domain so critical  to national security and the modern economy. 
Third, the executive branch must be organized to achieve  the agility and coherence necessary to effectively plan,  support, and employ government cyber resources. There  
)  
  
e
,
g
n
n
a
e
l
r
l
T
a
 
h
h
n
C
 
a
s
l
h
a
K
u
 
s
/
i
 
t
V
c
 
e
y
t
ff
i
E
r
 
u
o
c
n
e
i
s
r
m
e
o
b
y
D
 
C
 
e
e
Th
(
Th
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 31 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
is no single voice charged and empowered with har monizing the executive branch’s policies, budgets, and  responsibilities in cyberspace; instead, many departments  and agencies, with different responsibilities for and inter ests in cybersecurity, compete for resources and authority.  
Fourth, the federal government must reform how it  recruits, trains, and educates its workforce to ensure that  
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #1:  
it has the necessary cybersecurity talent. Shortages in  such talent are widespread in both the public and private  sectors, and the federal government has a role to play (in  partnership with academia and industry) to “grow the  pie” of qualified cybersecurity workers, make certain that  existing sources of talent are not overlooked, and build  the pipelines and career paths that put the right people in  the right places for confronting threats from cyberspace. 
ALIGN U.S. GOVERNMENT STRATEGY WITH LAYERED CYBER DETERRENCE 
The executive branch should develop and issue a new national cyber strategy reflecting the strategic approach  of layered cyber deterrence, emphasizing resilience and public-private collaboration, and including the  concept of defend forward, to raise the costs and lower the benefits for malicious cyber activity. Today  various departments and agencies constitute critical but separate components of an effective national cyber  strategy that should be better integrated into a coherent national strategy. This approach will enable the U.S.  government to achieve speed and agility, a bias for action, and effectiveness in cyberspace.  
Key Recommendation 
1.1 The executive branch should issue an updated National Cyber Strategy.
The executive branch should issue an updated National  Cyber Strategy that embraces the concept of layered  cyber deterrence, with an emphasis on resilience, public and private-sector collaboration, and defend forward as  key elements.  
Any effective strategy for cyberspace will require a coor dinated effort across the multiple stakeholders within the  federal government, state and local governments, and  the private sector that are all responsible for securing and  defending the United States in this domain. Therefore, the  strategy must explicitly align and synchronize stakeholder  strategic objectives, identify lines of effort to put the strat egy into operation, clarify what priority should be given to  various efforts, and articulate common principles of risk. 
Importantly, the National Cyber Strategy should include  key concepts of layered cyber deterrence. The first is  deterrence, which has been a long-standing strategic  posture of the United States. Deterrence seeks to pre vent an adversary from taking an undesired action by  making a credible threat to impose costs, deny gains, or  shape behavior. Second, it should prioritize deterrence  by denial, which, in cyberspace, must include increasing  the defense and security of cyberspace through resilience  and public- and private-sector collaboration. As more  and more of our critical systems—including those that  underpin our national security, economy, public health  and safety, and elections—come to rely on technology,  ensuring the resilience of these technological systems  becomes synonymous with ensuring the resilience of the  
32 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
nation as a whole. A resilient nation deters adversaries  by denying them the gains they seek from attacking  the United States. Furthermore, as the majority of  U.S. systems and assets are owned and operated by the  private sector, ensuring resilience and defense should be a  responsibility shared between government and industry.  Working together with the private sector to reduce the  vulnerabilities adversaries can target, and mitigating  the consequences even if vulnerabilities are successfully  exploited, the United States can deny them opportunities  to attack American interests through cyberspace.  
Third, defend forward, which currently anchors the  DoD’s 2018 Cyber Strategy, should be integrated into  the broader framework of how the government employs  authorities that bear on cyber defense in support of over all layered cyber deterrence goals. Defend forward posits  that to disrupt and defeat adversaries’ ongoing malicious  cyber campaigns, deter future campaigns, and reinforce  favorable international norms of behavior, the United  States must proactively observe, pursue, and counter  adversary operations and impose costs in day-to-day com petition. The strategy should clearly express that defend  forward is an integral part of a comprehensive approach  that encompasses all of the instruments of national power  beyond the employment of strictly military capabilities;  these include trade and economic efforts, law enforce ment activities, and diplomatic tools. 
In describing its defend forward component, the  National Cyber Strategy must clarify a number of points: • Defend forward is an inherently defensive strategy  that seeks to defend the United States in cyberspace.  However, there are offensive components at the  tactical and operational levels. This is because to  achieve defensive strategic objectives in cyberspace,  forces and capabilities must be forward-positioned,  both geographically and virtually. Such positioning  is consistent with defensive strategic objectives of  analogous historical strategies of forward defense.  • Defend forward is consistent with norms of accept able behavior defined by the United States and  
like-minded nations with a shared global interest in  a stable cyberspace. At the same time, the National  Cyber Strategy should acknowledge that norms  of acceptable behavior will not emerge unless the  United States is willing to act, in concert with allies  whenever possible, to impose meaningful costs on  bad actors in cyberspace to change their behavior.  
• To induce adversaries to change their behavior, the  United States must create costs below the threshold  at which the full spectrum of credible retaliatory  response options may be triggered. In doing so, the  United States must ensure that effective policies and  processes are in place to guide such actions consistent  with the rule of law and adequate risk assessments.  
Finally, the National Cyber Strategy should articulate  a framework for how the U.S. government should put  the approach into operation that is organized around six  pillars: reform the U.S. government’s structure and orga nization for cyberspace, strengthen norms and non-mili tary tools, promote national resilience, reshape the cyber  ecosystem toward greater security, operationalize cyberse curity collaboration with the private sector, and preserve  and employ the military instrument of power. 
Enabling Recommendations 
1.1.1 Develop a Multitiered Signaling  Strategy 
A key objective of defend forward, as a component of  layered cyber deterrence, is to create costs for adversaries  in order to change their behavior, while minimizing the  risks of escalation. However, the logic of defend forward  (as detailed in the 2018 DoD Cyber Strategy) is missing  an explicit discussion of signaling. To change adversar ies’ behavior, it is not sufficient to simply counter their  campaigns and impose costs. Rather, the United States  must signal capability and resolve, as well as communi cate how it seeks to change adversary behavior and shape  the strategic environment. Signaling is also essential for  escalation management so that actions taken in support  of defend forward are not unintentionally perceived as  escalatory. Cyber operations and campaigns that are not 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 33 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
combined with deliberate signaling, so that adversaries  understand what the United States seeks to achieve, will  not always be sufficient to change adversary behavior.  Signaling should entail coordinated employment of  various instruments of power. 
Therefore, the U.S. government should develop a mul titiered signaling strategy aimed at altering adversaries’  decision calculus and addressing risks of escalation. This  signaling strategy should also effectively communicate to  allies and partners U.S. goals and intent. 
• The strategic level of signaling should involve overt,  public diplomatic signaling through traditional  mechanisms that have already been established for  other domains, as well as private diplomatic com munications through mechanisms such as hotlines  and other nonpublic channels (including third-party  channels in instances in which the United States may  lack robust diplomatic relationships). 
• The operational and tactical levels should involve  clandestine, protected, and covert signaling (includ ing through non-cyber means) that is deliberately  coupled with cyber operations. An example of this  type of signaling is tailored messaging preceding or  running concurrently with defend forward cyber  operations. 
A signaling strategy should also include a framework to  guide when and under what conditions the U.S. govern ment will voluntarily self-attribute cyber operations and  
campaigns for the purposes of signaling capability and  intent to various audiences. 
1.1.2 Promulgate a New Declaratory Policy When buttressed with clear and consistent action, a  declaratory policy is essential for deterrence because it can  credibly convey resolve. The United States’ declaratory  policy regarding cyberspace now is organized around a  
use-of-force threshold—which is deliberately politically  and legally ambiguous—and reserves the right for the  United States to respond to a cyberattack in a time,  place, and manner of its choosing. There are two notable  challenges with the current stance. 
• First, the existing declaratory policy does not suf ficiently communicate resolve or articulate a com pelling logic of consequences. Therefore, the U.S.  government should promulgate a new declaratory  policy around a use-of-force threshold. Specifically,  the U.S. government should publicly convey that it  will respond using swift, costly, and, where possible,  transparent consequences against cyber activities that  constitute what the United States defines as a use of  force. This would reinforce deterrence of strategic  cyberattacks. 
• Second, our adversaries are clearly exploiting the  current threshold to conduct a range of malicious  activities that do not rise to a level warranting  a major retaliatory response. Examples include  cyber-enabled large-scale theft of intellectual  property and cyber-enabled influence operations.  Therefore, the U.S. government should announce  a second declaratory policy. This policy should  clearly state that the United States will respond  using cyber and non-cyber capabilities to counter  and impose costs against adversary cyber campaigns  below a use-of-force threshold. These responses  would create sufficient costs to alter the adver sary’s calculus, but they would be different from  responses to adversary actions above the use-of force threshold in their means (e.g., conventional  vs. unconventional military capabilities) and their  magnitude, consistent with international law.  Essentially, the U.S. government should publicly  declare that it will defend forward, and couple its  declaration with decisive and consistent action  across all elements of national power.
34 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  
AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #2:  
STREAMLINE CONGRESSIONAL OVERSIGHT AND AUTHORITY OVER  CYBERSECURITY ISSUES 
Congress should establish clear oversight responsibility and authority over cyberspace within the legislative  branch of the U.S. government. Responsibility for cyberspace is currently dispersed throughout Congress,  and the large number of committees and subcommittees claiming some form of jurisdiction impedes  action and clarity of oversight. By centralizing responsibility in the new House Permanent Select and  Senate Select Committees on Cybersecurity, Congress will be empowered to provide coherent oversight to  government strategy and activity in cyberspace. 
Key Recommendation 
1.2 Congress should create House Permanent Select and Senate Select Committees on  Cybersecurity to consolidate budgetary and legislative jurisdiction over cybersecurity issues, as  well as traditional oversight authority.
Currently, and in both chambers of Congress, legislative  and budgetary jurisdiction and oversight for cybersecurity  are dispersed across numerous committees and subcom mittees. This congressional structure on cybersecurity  prevents Congress from effectively providing strategic  oversight of the executive branch’s cybersecurity efforts or  exerting its traditional oversight authority for executive  action and policy in cyberspace. 
Congress has previously faced a comparable challenge.  When the 94th Congress (1975–77) investigated  allegations of abuses of authority, illegal activity, and  improprieties by members of what we now refer to as the  intelligence community, Congress substantiated many of  the claims and found them to have been enabled by poor  congressional oversight. Congress addressed this problem  by establishing the House Permanent Select and Senate  Select Committees on Intelligence.158 
To consolidate oversight and ensure the implementa tion of effective cybersecurity strategy and policy, the  Commission recommends establishing a Permanent  
Select Committee on Cybersecurity in the House and a  Select Committee on Cybersecurity in the Senate. These  
committees would have legislative jurisdiction over the  broad integration of systemic cybersecurity strategy and  policy both within government and between the govern ment and the private sector. They would also have over 
sight responsibilities for executive branch responses to  domestic and foreign cybersecurity threats, government  organization or reorganization to deal with cybersecurity  threats, the protection of federal networks, the confirma tion of relevant Senate-confirmed cybersecurity officials,  and the consolidation of federal reporting requirements  for cyber initiatives and relevant data. 
Membership and Structure: Like the Select Committees  on Intelligence, these committees should be structured  in a bipartisan manner while prioritizing expertise.  Committee membership, including chair and ranking  member roles, should be determined by congressional  leadership as conventional committee assignments, while  the chairs and ranking members of other cyber-relevant  committees (as determined by congressional leadership)  should also serve as ex-officio members of this commit tee. Also, like the Select Committees on Intelligence,  these committees should have a membership structure  designed to encourage cross-committee collaboration  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 35 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
and the sharing of best practices. The final committee  composition should be proportionate to each party’s  composition of the House, and one more seat given to  the majority party in the Senate; to promote institutional  knowledge, committee members should be exempt from  any term limits. 
Jurisdiction and Authorities: The House Permanent Select  and Senate Select Committees on Cybersecurity would  consider legislation, hold hearings, subpoena witnesses,  and consider nominations relevant to improving the  United States’ public and private systemic cybersecurity  against domestic and foreign risks (including state-spon sored threats); they would oversee development and  implementation of national cybersecurity strategies and  policies, oversight of the compliance of components of  federal agencies charged with cybersecurity policy and  defensive operations, the organization or reorganization  of agencies related to cybersecurity threats or incidents,  and authorizations for appropriations relating to protect ing against cybersecurity threats and relevant incidents or  actions. These committees would also receive recurring  briefings on national-level risk management assessments,  national-level tabletop exercises, and other federal report ing requirements for cyber initiatives and relevant data. 
This jurisdiction is designed to emphasize advancing  national systemic cybersecurity, strengthening the digital  ecosystem, and improving whole-of-nation cybersecurity  
resilience. It is not intended to include activities already  overseen by the House and Senate Armed Services  Committees or the two chambers’ committees on intel ligence (such as Title 10 or Title 50 activities, or coun terintelligence activities carried out under Title 18), or  to be excessively duplicative of existing executive branch  oversight channels. 
Enabling Recommendation  
1.2.1 Reestablish the Office of Technology  Assessment 
Congress should reestablish and fund the Office of  Technology Assessment (OTA), or another similar  agency, to advise both chambers on cyber and technol ogy policy issues. Before it was dissolved in 1995, OTA  produced over 750 reports in nearly a quarter century  of operations for both congressional and public con sumption, ensuring that the legislative branch was fully  informed on technology-related legislative issues that fell  within its purview.159 Other congressional efforts to build  capacity in this area, such as charging the Government  Accountability Office with responsibility for technical  assessment, have not been able to satisfactorily fill the  gap left by the loss of OTA. The scientific and technology  challenges facing policymakers are only becoming more  complex, and Congress would benefit from the agility,  depth, breadth, and objectivity of insight and analysis  provided by an office focused on technology. 
36 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  
AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #3:  
REFORM THE EXECUTIVE BRANCH TO BE MORE AGILE AND EFFECTIVE IN  CYBERSPACE 
The executive branch should be restructured and streamlined in order that clear responsibilities and  authorities over cyberspace can be established while it is empowered to proactively develop, implement,  and execute its strategy for cyberspace. Many departments and agencies, with different responsibilities  for and interests in securing cyberspace, compete for resources and power, resulting in conflicting efforts  sometimes carried out at cross-purposes. More consolidated accountability for harmonizing the executive  branch’s policies, budgets, and responsibilities in cyberspace while it implements strategic guidance from  the President and Congress is needed to achieve coherence in the planning, resourcing, and employing of  government cyber resources. 
Key Recommendation 
1.3 Congress should establish a National Cyber Director (NCD), within the Executive Office of the  President, who is Senate-confirmed and supported by the Office of the National Cyber Director.  The NCD would serve as the President’s principal advisor for cybersecurity and associated  emerging technology issues; the lead for national-level coordination for cyber strategy, policy,  and defensive cyber operations; and the chief U.S. representative and spokesperson on  cybersecurity issues.
The NCD would be appointed by and report directly to  the President, be Senate-confirmed, and be supported by  a concurrently established Office of the National Cyber  Director inside the Executive Office of the President  (EOP). (It thus would be positioned similarly to the  Office of the U.S. Trade Representative.) The NCD  nomination to the Senate would be considered by  both the Armed Services and Homeland Security and  Governmental Affairs Committees, until and unless a  Select Committee on Cybersecurity (recommendation  1.2) is established, at which time the latter committee  should assume primary jurisdiction over the NCD nomi nation and office. 
Numerous commissions, initiatives, and studies have rec ommended a more robust and institutionalized nation al-level mechanism for coordinating cybersecurity and  associated emerging technology issues, and for overseeing  the executive branch’s development and implementation  
of an integrated national cybersecurity strategy. As emerg ing technology- and cyberspace-related issues become  more complex, and consequently a greater threat to U.S.  national security, the President’s need for sound advice  and timely options will be increasingly critical.  
The NCD would not direct or manage day-to-day  cybersecurity policy or the operations of any one federal  agency, but instead will be responsible for the integra tion of cybersecurity policy and operations across the  executive branch. Specifically, the NCD would (1) be  the President’s principal advisor on cybersecurity and  associated emerging technology issues and the lead  national-level coordinator for cyber strategy and policy;  (2) oversee and coordinate federal government activities  to defend against adversary cyber operations inside the  United States; (3) with concurrence from the National  Security Advisor or the National Economic Advisor,  would convene Cabinet-level or National Security  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 37 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
Council (NSC) Principals Committee–level meetings and  associated preparatory meetings; and (4) would provide  budgetary review of designated agency cybersecurity  budgets. 
Structure and Responsibilities: The NCD, supported by the  Office of the National Cyber Director within the White  House’s EOP, would report directly to the President. The  NCD would serve on the NSC for relevant (cybersecurity  and associated emerging technology) issues. The NCD  would lead the development and coordination of nation al-level cyber strategy, cyber policy, and defensive cyber  operations, including working through the NSC process  to set national-level priorities and produce the National  Cyber Strategy of the United States. The NCD would  also lead White House efforts to support and develop  the private-public collaboration needed to defend our  national critical infrastructure and provide coordination  on emerging cross-cutting technology and security chal lenges, such as intellectual property theft, 5G infrastruc ture policy, and internet governance.  
Authorities: The NCD would be added to the statutory  list of National Security Council regular attendees. With  concurrence from the National Security Advisor or the  National Economic Advisor, the NCD would have  the capability to convene Cabinet or NSC Principals  Committee meetings and the numerous associated pre paratory meetings to address cybersecurity and emerging  technology issues. Further, the NCD would oversee the  compliance of executive departments and agencies with  national-level guidance on cybersecurity priorities, strat egies, policies, and resource allocations. The NCD will  coordinate interagency efforts to defend against adversary  cyber operations against domestic U.S. interests; this  
will not impinge on DoD responsibility for Title 10  activities, Office of the Director of National Intelligence  (ODNI) responsibility for Title 50 activities, or the U.S.  Department of Justice (DOJ) and Federal Bureau of  Investigation (FBI) responsibility for counterintelligence  activities, but the NCD would be kept fully apprised of  those activities.  
The NCD would have budgetary oversight over the  cybersecurity community, which is defined as including  those areas within the executive branch whose work is  critical to the success of the National Cyber Strategy.  In the executive branch, each program manager, agency  head, and department head with responsibilities under  the National Cyber Strategy shall transmit the cyber bud get request of the program, agency, or department to the  NCD prior to sending it to the Office of Management  and Budget (OMB). If the NCD determines that the  budget proposed is not in alignment with the National  Cyber Strategy, then he or she will recommend appro priate revisions. The NCD’s passback revisions must  be addressed in the proposed budget and submitted to  OMB along with a statement describing the impact of  the required budgetary changes on the ability of that pro gram, agency, or department to perform its mission, or,  if they cannot be implemented under reasonable circum stances or timelines, what obstacles must be overcome in  order to do so. Any significant changes by OMB to the  cybersecurity budget of any agency or department would  require the concurrence of the NCD. 
Resources: The Office of the National Cyber Director  would be staffed at a size similar to that of comparable  EOP institutions (approximately 50 persons).160
38 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  
AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
Key Recommendation 
1.4 Congress should strengthen the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) in  its mission to ensure national resilience of critical infrastructure, to promote a more secure cyber  ecosystem, and to serve as the central civilian cybersecurity authority to support federal, state  and local, and private-sector cybersecurity efforts.
Congress and successive administrations have worked  diligently to establish CISA, creating a new agency that  can leverage broad authorities to receive and share infor mation, provide technical assistance to operators, and  partner with stakeholders across the executive branch,  state and local communities, and private sector. CISA  has the mission of ensuring the security and resilience of  critical infrastructure and is intended to be a keystone of  national cybersecurity efforts. CISA, through partnering  with the private sector and coordinating across govern ment, is charged with securing the critical infrastructure  and functions on which the American government  and economy rely and ensuring a coordinated civilian  response to cyber threats.  
While CISA has worked aggressively to carry out these  significant duties, it has not been adequately resourced  or empowered to do so. The agency’s convening power,  though a critical tool in public-private collaboration,  
is not widely understood or consistently recognized. In  addition, the agency lacks the analytic capacity to assess,  plan for, and lead efforts to mitigate national systemic  cyber risk; nor does it have the dedicated resources to  extend its activities sufficiently beyond federal informa tion technology (IT) practices to capture a nationwide  perspective on cybersecurity risk and resilience. The  establishment of CISA has not effectively centralized  federal civilian responsibilities; rather, uncertainty and  ambiguity about the roles of sector-specific agencies and  other federal agencies continue. To realize policymakers’  ambitions for CISA to improve the nation’s cybersecurity,  it must be strengthened and resourced appropriately  for its growing role and status as an operational agency  within DHS.  
Strengthen the Director Position: Congress should give the  Director of CISA a five-year term and elevate the position  to level II of the Executive Schedule, or equivalent to  a Deputy Secretary and to Military Service Secretaries.  Congress should also consider making the posts of  Assistant Director career positions to provide greater  consistency and continuity. 
Program and Support Resources: Congress should increase  CISA’s funding for administrative and programs support,  so that it can enhance current operations and transition  from being a headquarters element to an operational  agency within DHS. Resources are particularly needed  to underwrite personnel recruitment, development, and  retention as well as analytic and big data processing to  support current programs. 
Expanded Budget: Congress should review CISA’s budget  and consider giving proportionally greater resources to  projects and programs intended to support private-sector  cybersecurity, to promote public-private integration, and  to increase situational awareness of threat. Nearly 60  percent of CISA’s budget is dedicated to federal cyber security, with only 15 percent committed to initiatives  supporting the private sector. In addition, Congress  should consider providing stable multiyear funding to  ensure the flexibility necessary to build lasting analytical  capability across multiple budget years. 
Appropriate Facilities: In developing the resources and  support model, the executive branch and Congress  should examine current CISA facilities and assess  their suitability to fully support current and projected  mission requirements nationally and regionally. The  General Services Administration should provide a report  to Congress including recommendations for further  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 39 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
CISA Director Christopher Krebs and former DHS Secretary  Kirstjen Nielsen hold a press conference on election  security in the National Cybersecurity and Communications  Integration Center (August 2018).
resources to procure or build a new facility or augment  existing facilities to ensure sufficient size and accommo dations for the integration of personnel from the private  sector and other departments and agencies to meet the  goals of this report. 
Incident Management and Recovery: Congress and the  U.S. government should strengthen CISA’s ability to aid  the public and private sectors in recovering from a sig nificant cyber incident. The agency should be sufficiently  funded and empowered to coordinate whole-of-govern ment efforts in managing incidents that are not met with  an “emergency declaration,” and to seamlessly integrate  with the Federal Emergency Management Agency when  they are. CISA must be prepared to use new authorities  and funds detailed in the “Promote National Resilience”  pillar, such as the Cyber State of Distress and Cyber  
)   
y
c
n
e
g
A
 
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
S
 
e
r
u
t
c
u
r
t
s
a
r
f
n
I
 
d
n
a
 
y
t
i
r
u
c
e
s
r
e
b
y
C
 
.
S
.
U
(
  

Response and Recovery Fund (recommendation 3.3),  and ensure that they are integrated into updates of the  National Cyber Incident Response Plan and a national  cyber response doctrine. Further, additional resources  are needed to conduct cross-agency and jurisdictional  
40 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
cybersecurity tabletop exercises and to support CISA’s  hunt and incident response team.  
National Risk Management: Congress should recognize  and provide sufficient resources to support CISA’s  emergent efforts to identify and mitigate risks to  national critical functions and to serve as the primary  federal entity responsible for organizing and coordinat ing whole-of-government, public-private activities to  identify, assess, and manage national risk. As detailed  in the “Promote National Resilience” pillar, Congress  should codify CISA responsibilities and ensure sufficient  resources for its national risk management programs,  including its support to sector-specific agencies, its  critical role in Continuity of the Economy planning (rec ommendation 3.2), and its identification of systemically  important critical infrastructure (recommendation 5.1). 
Cyber Defense and Security Collaboration: Congress and the  U.S. government should strengthen CISA’s operational  capabilities by equipping it with the resources, tools,  and authorities necessary to fully integrate the govern ment’s and the private sector’s understanding of cyber  threat into a cohesive, national picture and coordinated  action. To support these efforts, further detailed below  in the “Operationalize Cybersecurity Collaboration  with the Private Sector” pillar, Congress should increase  government support to systemically important critical  infrastructure (recommendation 5.1), establish and fund  a Joint Collaborative Environment (recommendation  5.2), increase integration among federal cyber centers and  CISA (recommendation 5.3), and establish a Joint Cyber  Planning Cell (recommendation 5.4).  
Cybersecurity Advisory Committee: The Secretary of  Homeland Security should establish a Cybersecurity  Advisory Committee to advise, consult, and make  recommendations to CISA on policies, programs, and  rulemakings, among other items, to account for non-fed eral interests. The committee should be exempt from  the requirements of the Federal Advisory Committee  Act and be composed of state, local, and private-sector  
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
representatives from across the 16 critical infrastructure  sectors.161 
Continuous Threat Hunting: Congress should strengthen  CISA’s ability to conduct continuous threat hunting  across .gov networks, which will enhance CISA’s ability to  both protect federal civilian networks and provide useful  threat intelligence to critical infrastructure. Continuous  threat hunting on the .gov domain will enable CISA to  quickly detect, identify, and mitigate threats to federal  networks. Resulting information on malware, indicators  of compromise, and adversary tactics, techniques, and  procedures can be shared with public and private critical  infrastructure, which may be similarly targeted by these  actors, to bolster their defenses.  
Enabling Recommendations 
1.4.1 Codify and Strengthen the Cyber  Threat Intelligence Integration Center The Office of the Director of National Intelligence,  through its Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration Center,  plays a critical role in generating a whole-of-government  understanding of significant cyber threats affecting the  United States and could assist in providing analysis and  coordination necessary for rapid and accurate attribution.  In the 2015 Presidential Memorandum that establishes  it, CTIIC is charged with acting as the primary federal  integration point for all-source analysis, production, and  dissemination of intelligence on significant malicious  cyber activity—to inform both U.S. government and  private-sector decision makers. However, CTIIC needs  to be fully resourced to carry out the entire scope of its  mission, including sufficient funding, manpower, and  analytical resources to fully support federal departments  and agencies in their operations and the intelligence  products that these agencies provide to private-sector and  international partners.  
To ensure adequate resources, Congress should codify  and establish CTIIC through legislation, using as a  model the 2015 Presidential Memorandum that created  the center, and strengthen CTIIC’s ability to carry out its 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 41 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
responsibilities, especially in enhancing the quality and  speed of attribution.  
• Congress should appropriate the resources necessary  for CTIIC to carry out all mission areas enumerated  in the 2015 Presidential Memorandum. 
• Congress should appropriate all necessary funds to  ensure that CTIIC can reliably provide reimburse ment to departments and agencies for detailees. 
• ODNI should continue existing efforts to improve  and expand the office’s cyber mission, including  operational and organizational improvements to  CTIIC. 
1.4.2 Strengthen the FBI’s Cyber Mission and  the National Cyber Investigative Joint Task  Force 
The cyber threat presents a unique challenge—it typically  involves foreign-based actors making use of domestic  infrastructure to obscure their true origin before vic timizing U.S. organizations and individuals. Therefore,  understanding the cyber threat requires domestic intel ligence gathering, evidence collection, technical and  human operations, and the cooperation of victims and  third-party providers to support investigative efforts. 
The FBI has a unique dual responsibility: to prevent  harm to national security as the nation’s domestic intel ligence agency and to enforce federal laws as the nation’s  primary federal law enforcement agency. Both roles are  essential to investigating and countering the cyber threat,  and are critical in supporting whole-of-government  campaigns supporting layered cyber deterrence. FBI’s  cyber mission—synthesized through the multiagency  National Cyber Investigative Joint Task Force (NCIJTF)  and a nationwide network of field offices and Cyber  Task Forces—has long participated in these coordinated  cyber campaigns. Officially established in 2008 under  National Security Presidential Directive (NSPD) 54,  the NCIJTF is composed of over 20 partnering agencies  
from across law enforcement, the intelligence commu nity, and the Department of Defense to coordinate,  integrate, and share information to support cyber threat  investigations. Additional resources for FBI and NCIJTF,  in combination with complementary recommendations  to strengthen CISA and ODNI’s CTIIC, will ensure  that they each can support the other and carry out their  respective missions. 
Congress and the executive branch should take steps  to ensure that the FBI is properly resourced to carry  out its cyber mission, perform attribution, strengthen  whole-of-government counter-threat campaigns, and  enable other agencies’ missions in support of national  strategic objectives. Specifically: 
• Enhance investigative and analytical personnel – FBI  investigators, analysts, and computer scientists are  located throughout the country to conduct the inves tigations and analysis necessary to attribute attacks to  and impose consequences on malicious cyber actors.  
• Expand technical capability – The FBI’s responses to  cyber incidents require sophisticated tools and plat forms to collect and analyze essential evidence and  enable investigative techniques. These technologies  are used by cyber investigators throughout the field  and by the FBI’s elite Cyber Action Team, deployed  worldwide as needed.  
• Empower interagency collaboration – To ensure that all  relevant agencies, such as U.S. Secret Service, are able  to participate in the NCIJTF, additional resources  are needed to adequately fund personnel-related  expenses.  
• Support joint operational resources – NCIJTF operates  the 24/7 CyWatch and the CyNERGY platform for  coordinating targeted entity (or victim) notifications.  These capabilities must be scaled up to meet the  requirements identified by CISA and other stake holders, including sector-specific agencies.
42 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  
AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #4:  
RECRUIT, DEVELOP, AND RETAIN A STRONGER FEDERAL CYBER  WORKFORCE 
The U.S. government should recruit, develop, and retain a cyber workforce capable of building a  defensible digital ecosystem and enabling the agile, effective deployment of all tools of national power  in cyberspace. Doing so will require designing innovative programs and partnerships to develop the  workforce, supporting and expanding good programs where they are already in place, and connecting  with a diverse pool of promising talent. Sometimes success in building a robust federal workforce depends  on elements outside of the federal government. In those cases, the U.S. government can and should play  a supporting role by providing its partners in workforce development the tools needed to accelerate the  increase in cyber personnel.  
Key Recommendation 
1.5 Congress and the executive branch should pass legislation and implement policies designed  to better recruit, develop, and retain cyber talent while acting to deepen and diversify the pool  of candidates for cyber work in the federal government.
The challenge of achieving effective security and defense  in cyberspace depends on people as much as it does on  technology or policy. Today, the U.S. government suffers  from a significant shortage in its cyber workforce. Across  the public sector more broadly, one in three positions  (more than 33,000) remains unfilled.162 These shortages  are driven by a need for personnel that have specific  cybersecurity skills and experience, but they are compli cated by government hiring, training, and development  pathways that are not well-suited to recruit and retain  those personnel.  
Commit to Recruiting beyond Conventional Pathways into  Government: The good news is that today’s cybersecurity  skills and experiences can be gained with unusual ease  outside standard channels of education and training. That  means, however, that the government must more effec tively take advantage of those unconventional pathways,  especially when they do not include typical college educa tion or prior government experience. Overall government  approaches to successfully deepen and diversify this  candidate pool should include: 
• Developing programs to bring in new employees via  apprenticeships, promoting cooperative study, and  expanding training programs so that existing workers  can enhance their career trajectories.  
• Researching and implementing measures of compe tency alongside more commonly used certifications. • Streamlining processes and reducing institutional  barriers to onboarding cyber talent quickly. 
• Identifying opportunities and building hiring path ways for members of underrepresented communities,  including the neurodiverse,163 women, and people of  color.  
Provide Policy and Legislative Tools to Grow the Cyber  Workforce: To achieve these objectives for recruiting  today’s cybersecurity talent into public service, the gov ernment should pursue the following: 
• Congress should fund research into the current state  of the cyber workforce, paths to entry, and demo graphics in coordination with the ongoing work  at the Office of Personnel Management (OPM),  DHS, the National Science Foundation (NSF), and  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 43 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
the National Institute of Standards and Technology  (NIST). This research should align with and/or build  on NIST’s National Initiative on Cybersecurity  Education (NICE) Cybersecurity Workforce  Framework, which outlines cybersecurity work  roles and the knowledge, skills, abilities, and tasks  involved in each role. New research should also build  on emerging work from NICE and others on career  paths and certifications. 
• Congress should resource recruiting programs spe cifically designed to target cyber talent and expand  current programs that have made demonstrated  progress in innovating recruitment. 
• Congress and the executive branch should reinforce  and authorize the role of the NICE in coordinating  U.S. government efforts to advance cybersecurity  workforce development nationwide, and resource the  office sufficiently for this role. 
• Congress should require the Government  Accountability Office (GAO) to issue a report within  one year: (1) estimating how frequently candidates  are deterred from pursuing government careers  because of delays in issuing security clearances;  (2) assessing the effectiveness of current clearance  processes at striking a balance between the national  security risk of insider threats, and the national  security risk of leaving cyber jobs vacant; and (3)  recommending a lead agency for developing and  implementing a plan for addressing any shortcom ings discovered.  
Develop and Retain Cybersecurity Talent: Upon enter ing government, cybersecurity personnel should have  rewarding career paths and the education and training  opportunities necessary to keep their skills relevant and  up-to-date in a rapidly changing field. To meet these  objectives, Congress should:  
• Fund DHS, NSF, and OPM to expand the existing  CyberCorps: Scholarship for Service program. Since  its inception in 2001, this proven program has  graduated 3,600 students. The program should be  
resourced to grow steadily and eventually reach as  many as 2,000 students per year.  
• Direct and fund CISA to design a process for one- to  three-year exchange assignments of cyber experts  from both CISA and the private sector. If successful,  this model should be expanded to other agencies as  well.  
• Direct OPM, NICE, and DoD to design cybersecu rity-specific upskilling and transition assistance pro grams for veterans and transitioning military service  members to move into federal civilian cybersecurity  jobs. 
• Direct OPM to require departments and agencies to  develop training for managers to cultivate practices  that foster a more diverse cyber workforce and more  inclusive work environment. 
• Require federal cyber contractors to implement  known best-practice workplace policies in order to  improve employee retention on federal contracts. 
• Direct OPM, in partnership with federal depart ments and agencies including NIST and DHS, to  issue a report evaluating the potential for a new Civil  Service Cyber: a system of established cyber career  paths that allows movement between departments  and agencies and into senior leadership positions.  In order to facilitate movement between different  departments and agencies, this plan should:  ű Establish greater standardization and demon 
strated equivalences across the government.  ű Incorporate competence-based metrics, work based learning programs, and—after rigorous  assessment of their utility and impact—cyber  aptitude tests.  
ű Include standardization tools such as the NICE  Cybersecurity Workforce Framework and the  Cyber Talent Management System (CTMS). The  new CTMS—to be launched at DHS starting in  FY2020—will establish a new DHS cybersecurity  service, composed of civilian employees hired  using streamlined processes, new assessments,  and market-sensitive compensation. If CTMS is 
44 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
successful at DHS, it should be considered for  aggressive expansion federal government–wide. 
Enabling Recommendation 
1.5.1 Improve Cyber-Oriented Education In almost every industry and discipline, future careers  will require both a basic and ongoing education in cyber.  It is increasingly vital that schools teach students to value  cybersecurity in their own decisions and to start cultivat ing the skills needed for a career in the field. Accordingly,  the federal government should provide resources, tools,  and incentives to encourage and aid local decision makers  in implementing improved cyber education in their  school systems. The U.S. government should: 
• Develop a secure online clearinghouse for K-12  classroom resources on cybersecurity. 
• Develop work-based learning programs and appren ticeships to supplement classroom learning. 
REFORM THE U.S. GOVERNMENT’S STRUCTURE  AND ORGANIZATION FOR CYBERSPACE 
• Support cybersecurity clinics at colleges and uni versities to serve as educational hands-on training  opportunities for students while serving as a valuable  resource to their community.  
• Expand the existing Centers of Academic Excellence  program to encourage cyber coursework in fields  such as business, law, and health care.  
• Incorporate cybersecurity into safety curricula for  career and technical education programs focused on  operational technology users, maintainers, and install ers, particularly in critical infrastructure fields.164 
• Promote professional development programs for  K-12 teachers that encourage them to model safe,  secure, and privacy-aware internet practices in class rooms (outside of specific cybersecurity instruction). 
• Further explore ways to expand programs such as the  FBI Cyber STEM program and CISA’s Cybersecurity  Education Training Assistance Program on a national  scale. 
How Can Public-Private Partnerships Help Build the Nation’s Cybersecurity Workforce? 
With more than 470,000 U.S. cybersecurity job vacancies in the private sector alone,165 simply expanding government recruit ment efforts is not sufficient to provide the cybersecurity workforce needed to protect national security. Rather, the nation’s  cybersecurity workforce development ecosystem must grow as a whole. Currently, innovative programs are taking the first  steps toward addressing this need by building partnerships between educators, government, and industry. For example: 
The Cybersecurity Apprenticeship Program in North Carolina: The state of North Carolina is working with Innovative Systems  Group, a local IT contracting firm, to train cybersecurity apprentices. The firm selects candidates—most of whom are veter ans—and places them in an immersive training program. Afterward, the apprentices work alongside mentors at the North  Carolina Department of Information Technology.166 
Cyber Talent Initiative: The Cyber Talent Initiative, a public-private partnership between Mastercard, Microsoft, Workday, the  nonprofit Partnership for Public Service, and the U.S. government, provides recent cybersecurity graduates with a job in the  federal government for two years and a chance to work for the partnering private-sector companies thereafter. Those who take  private-sector jobs receive $75,000 in student loan support.167 
By drawing on different resources from across academia, industry, and government, these programs increase the pool of  skilled workers available throughout the ecosystem while reducing or eliminating the cost of learning to individuals in the pro grams. The federal government cannot focus merely on cutting itself a bigger slice of the cybersecurity workforce pie. Rather,  by using tools like these partnerships—and carefully evaluating progress—the government must support growing the whole  pie of talent needed throughout the nation.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 45 
STRENGTHEN NORMS AND  NON-MILITARY TOOLS
Layered cyber deterrence includes shaping the behav ior of cyber actors through strengthened norms of  responsible state behavior and strengthened non-military  tools. Norms, which are “collective expectations for the  proper behavior of actors with a given identity,”168 already  exist in cyberspace but can be bolstered by building on  the United States’ network of international allies and  partners and their shared commitment to enforcing those  expectations. Together, like-minded states with a com mon vision of an open, free, and stable cyberspace can  better shape behavior through the attribution of malign  actors and the application of the full range of government  powers in a cooperative and consistent manner. Non military tools of state power such as law enforcement,  sanctions, diplomatic engagement, and capacity building  are among the options for generating credible costs and  benefits for norms enforcement, and they are more effec tive when applied in concert with international partners  and allies.  
While unilateral activity can provide the greatest short term flexibility, norms-based multilateral engagement  provides a more effective means to reduce the likelihood  and effectiveness of cyberattacks for three reasons.  
First, norms change an adversary’s decision calculus.  When malicious actors know that rule breaking will be  confronted by a global community of allies and part ners—rather than a small group of individual states— they anticipate that bad behavior is likely to be more  severely punished.  
Second, a system of norms enforced by multiple actors  is a relatively cost-effective means of bringing greater sta bility to cyberspace because it reduces the burden on any  one nation to reinforce the system of norms. The costs  and effort associated with activities such as intelligence  collection and analysis, attribution, and response actions  
can be shared and the activities more effectively carried  out by the coalition.  
Third, frameworks of norms are sticky—once a pat tern of behavior is set, the framework becomes hard to  dislodge. The United States and its allies would therefore  benefit from being the first to establish the norms agen da.169 These three arguments for effectiveness underscore  not that a norms-based system is infallible, but rather  that it is well-suited to serve as a first layer of deterrence,  complemented by other layers. Accordingly, maximizing  the effectiveness of norms and non-military tools of  statecraft leads to a more stable and secure cyberspace. 
The United States is confronted with a challenge in build ing a community of like-minded states. A small coalition  of its closest allies offers agility and trust because the  members share principles and goals. However, engagement  with a large and diverse community of partners builds  broader support for an open, free, and stable cyberspace.  Such an inclusive approach is especially important cur rently because U.S. adversaries are engaging diplomatically  with non-aligned states to erode this common vision for  the internet.170 The United States has begun to address the  task of striking the right balance between agility and inclu sivity both through the U.S. State Department’s Cyber  Deterrence Initiative, which is designed to bring together  like-minded partners and allies to deter malicious behavior,  and through other diplomatic outreach. Though this is an  important start, to be truly effective the State Department’s  efforts in cyberspace diplomacy must be adequately sup ported and resourced.  
Having a community of like-minded states can better  strengthen norms and shape behavior through the  collective imposition of non-military tools of state power,  including sanctions, law enforcement, and intelligence  sharing. These partners can, on a voluntary basis, add  
46 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
their voices to public statements and attributions, and  participate in other consequences outside of the cyber  domain. They may also engage in exercises to demon 
strate joint capacity and preparedness to adversaries.  Ultimately, a coalition can be effective in enforcing rules  only if rules exist and align with the U.S. vision for an  open, interoperable, reliable, and secure internet. 
Preserving a secure and open internet is not just a diplo matic challenge; it is also a technical one. An internet that  prioritizes the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of  information for all users depends on shared implementa tion of secure protocols and standards. By participating  in standards-setting bodies and building a reputation for  making contributions to the global body of best practices,  the U.S. technical community, particularly the National  Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)—together  
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE:  
STRENGTHEN NORMS AND NON-MILITARY TOOLS 
with like-minded state and non-state contributors—can  serve as a defense against adversaries who would steer the  internet toward greater surveillance and fragmentation.  
The recommendations supporting this pillar empha size strengthening norms and non-military tools of  state power. Creating within the U.S. Department of  State the Bureau of Cyberspace Security and Emerging  Technologies, led by an Assistant Secretary of State,  will bring leadership and focus to this effort. Enhanced  tools, including cyber capacity building, international  cyber law enforcement, sanctions and trade enforcement,  attribution capability, and confidence-building measures  as part of the non-military component of defend forward,  can be used by the United States, along with its partners  and allies, to impose costs, encourage responsible state  behavior, and promote a stable cyberspace.  
EXPAND EFFORTS THROUGH INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT TO  STRENGTHEN AND REINFORCE NORMS IN CYBERSPACE 
The United States should create a broad like-minded community of allies and partners to maintain and  reinforce norms that underpin a favorable cyber landscape. International norms are the framework upon  which all measures for shaping behavior in cyberspace are built. Aligning this framework with U.S.  interests and values is critical. Moreover, if the international community does not generally agree to or  understand what the United States considers acceptable behavior, then efforts to punish bad behavior and  reward responsible behavior may be ineffective or misinterpreted.  
Key Recommendation 
2.1 Congress should create and adequately resource, within the U.S. Department of State, the  Bureau of Cyberspace Security and Emerging Technologies (CSET), led by an Assistant Secretary  of State. 
Expectations for behavior—norms—already exist in  cyberspace, but some state and non-state actors defy  them, eroding their effectiveness. The United States can  reinforce these expectations by assembling a coalition  
of allies and like-minded partners to collectively incen tivize responsible state behavior in cyberspace and hold  states accountable for bad behavior. Responses to malign  behavior are more effective when carried out by multiple  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 47 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
governments acting in concert. Building this coalition  in the face of competing efforts from China and Russia  takes leadership, resources, and personnel, however. To  enable the U.S. State Department to form such a coali tion, Congress should create the Bureau of Cyberspace  Security and Emerging Technologies (CSET), led by an  Assistant Secretary reporting to the Under Secretary for  Political Affairs or someone of higher rank.  
In addition to guiding the formation of a coalition of like minded partners and allies, the bureau should be respon sible for a range of mission sets required to implement  layered cyber deterrence. These areas should include advo cating for norms of responsible state behavior in cyberspace  and confidence-building measures, responding diplomat ically with the international community to cyber threats,  advocating for internet freedom, ensuring a secure digital  economy, building capacity in our partners and allies to  combat cybercrime, and any other mission areas that the  Secretary of State assigns to the bureau. Collectively, these  elements work together as part of defending forward.  CSET will not replace the overseas work of other agen cies, but rather will ensure the coherence of U.S. efforts  abroad and ensure the alignment of those efforts with U.S.  national strategy. The head of this bureau should be Senate confirmed and hold the rank and status of ambassador.  He or she should coordinate international issues with the  National Cyber Director, and both would testify before the  newly formed Select Cybersecurity Committees. 
Congress should provide additional funding to this  new bureau for its personnel and programs needed to  carry out its international cyber mission, especially the  mission of building a robust coalition. The mandate for  the new CSET bureau is particularly critical because  like-minded partners and allies who support a rules-based  international order in cyberspace expand the capacity for  enforcing such rules while reducing the expense to any  one government of holding bad actors accountable for  violating them. The U.S. government has already begun  work to build a coalition of like-minded partners and  allies,171 and these efforts should be resourced to expand  
to the fullest scale possible. This coalition building is the  primary focus of the Department of State’s emerging  Cyber Deterrence Initiative (CDI). The U.S. government  should maximize the utility of this approach by strength ening existing bilateral and multilateral relationships,  such as the Five Eyes (the intelligence alliance comprising  Australia, Canada, New Zealand, the United Kingdom,  and the United States) and NATO, and by bringing new  nations into the coalition.  
Partners and allies contribute to the coalition in a  variety of ways. A highly capable and committed core  of closely aligned allies is essential, but cultivating new  partners even among less closely aligned or technically  capable states remains valuable. These partners can, on  a voluntary basis, add their voices to public statements  and attributions, and participate in other consequences  outside of the cyber domain (e.g., sanctions). They may  also engage in exercises to demonstrate to adversaries the  coalition’s joint capacity and preparedness. Over time, the  coalition could expand its focus from guaranteeing clear  and credible consequences for bad behavior to preventing  and constraining such behavior before it happens.  
Commitments with aligned allies and partners should not  preclude broader international engagement. Coordinating  with the international community writ large to harmo nize policies and practices is a crucial first step toward  creating a rules-based order in cyberspace. Ultimately,  long-term change in norms enforcement requires  engagement from the larger international community—a  process that starts with appropriate leadership, resources,  and personnel within the Department of State.  
Enabling Recommendations  
2.1.1 Strengthen Norms of Responsible State  Behavior in Cyberspace 
The international community has agreed to cyber  norms in several forums, including the United Nations.  However, these norms have been unevenly implemented  and enforced. Furthermore, our adversaries are using  these bodies to advance alternative visions for the future 
48 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
of cyberspace. Smart engagement with the interna tional community there will strengthen existing norms  and ensure countries’ continued alignment with the  U.S. vision for a free and open future of the internet.  Therefore, the U.S. government, led by CSET, should: 
• Take a sector-by-sector approach to norms implementa tion: Prioritize norms against malicious cyber activity  targeting elements of critical infrastructure that  underpin shared global stability, such as the financial  services sector, building on the existing norm against  attacking critical infrastructure (CI). 
• Discuss norms at head-of-state levels: Seek to address,  where practical, cyberspace policy in venues in which  heads of state participate, such as the G7 and G20.  
STRENGTHEN NORMS AND NON-MILITARY TOOLS 
• Engage in both inclusive and exclusive forums:  
Expand engagement in the United Nations Group  of Governmental Experts on Developments in the  Field of Information and Telecommunications in  the Context of International Security (UN GGE)  and the Open-Ended Working Group (OEWG),  the Organization for Security and Co-operation in  Europe (OSCE), and other forums. These organiza tions provide important venues in which to reinforce  rules that support the U.S. vision for an open,  
interoperable, reliable, and secure internet.  
Since 2009, the UN GGE has been a productive venue  for the United States. Although the group was unable 
Why Is International Engagement So Critical to Securing Cyberspace? 
If the United States does not proactively advocate for an open, interoperable, reliable, and secure internet, then those with  an alternative authoritarian vision will win the day in international forums, harming both U.S. national security and U.S. eco nomic interests. Achieving layered cyber deterrence against this authoritarian vision will require a resourced and effective  Department of State to coordinate diplomatic efforts and reinforce free and open cyber norms. 
Unfortunately, efforts to expand authoritarian norms have already begun. The United Nations in 2018 adopted a Russian- and  Chinese-supported resolution that would fundamentally change efforts against cybercrime. It could eventually lead to a  fragmented internet, undermining international cybercrime investigations and allowing greater state control of cyberspace  infrastructure to suppress dissent.172 The Russian- and Chinese-supported resolution threatens to normalize actions by author itarian governments to exert greater control over online speech, block websites critical of their rule, and coordinate with other  governments to isolate, undermine, and oppress dissidents abroad.173 
Our competitors understand what is at stake and are investing heavily in shaping the diplomatic environment for this author itarian vision of cyberspace—all while the United States’ investments in cyberspace diplomacy have lagged. After significant  increases, China is now the second-largest contributor to the UN budget, and it is seeking to maximize its influence in that  body.174 Outside the UN, analysts estimate that Chinese spending on public diplomacy and propaganda outpaces the U.S.  Department of State’s spending by about 17 times.175 For the first time in decades, the United States no longer leads the world  in the number of diplomatic posts—China is now the most-networked great power.176 As Russia and China work together  to challenge the U.S. vision of cyberspace, China’s increasing diplomatic presence puts weight behind the strategic aims of  Russia’s UN proposal.  
Governance of cyberspace is complex, and the domain cannot be kept free and open without widespread support. Without  well-resourced and persistent diplomatic efforts, the United States will be unable to effectively advocate for and defend its  values in international forums, leaving our adversaries to use cyberspace diplomacy as a means to promote their authoritarian  interests and cause permanent damage to cyberspace and the internet’s fundamental principles.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 49 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
to produce a consensus report after its 2016–17  meeting,177 it continues to serve as a gathering  point for states to establish shared understandings  of acceptable behavior in cyberspace. U.S. foreign  policy can draw on those understandings to build  consensus around the imposition of costs—for  example, by using sanctions, indictments,  diplomatic signaling,178 and other mechanisms to  punish rule breaking. But while the United States  has focused on like-minded states to preserve  the effectiveness of the UN GGE in the face of  Russian and Chinese efforts to derail progress,  Russia has recently initiated the OEWG, a  parallel multilateral process that engages a much  broader set of actors.179 This larger OEWG risks  taking the norms conversation in a direction  that may not benefit the United States in the  long term. However, the OEWG simultane 
)   
n
i
a
m
o
D
 
c
i
l
b
u
P
 
/
o
t
o
h
P
 
t
n
e
m
t
r
a
p
e
D
 
e
t
a
t
S
(
Deputy Secretary of State John Sullivan hosts the Ministerial Meeting  on Advancing Responsible State Behavior in Cyberspace, on the  margins of the 73rd Session of the United Nations General Assembly, in  New York City on September 28, 2018.
ously provides the United States with an opportunity to  engage with states that could be persuaded to embrace  a more like-minded viewpoint on norms in cyberspace.  In order to bring more states into the fold, the United  States should continue to enter all such forums to discuss  responsible state behavior with a diverse group of nations. 
In addition, the U.S. government should take a  multi-stakeholder approach to strengthening norms.  While the ultimate authority to establish rules for respon sible state behavior should be left to states themselves,  non-state actors ideally should be included in a consul tative capacity whenever possible. Because entities in the  private sector and other non-state actors own and operate  much of the internet’s infrastructure, their involvement  adds potentially valuable information and technical  capabilities (e.g., taking down malicious infrastructure) to  strengthen norms of behavior in cyberspace. 
2.1.2 Engage Actively and Effectively in  Forums Setting International Information and  Communications Technology Standards  The U.S. government should more actively and effectively  participate in forums setting international information  
and communications technology (ICT) standards. U.S.  values, interests, and security are strengthened when ICT  standards are developed and set with active American  participation. Yet compared to its adversaries, the United  States is not participating as much or as effectively in  these forums, putting it at a distinct disadvantage. U.S.  adversaries are currently sending a wide range of experts  who are drawing on their technical depth, negotiating  capability, and commercial expertise to shape interna tional ICT standards in their favor. 
Congress should empower and sufficiently resource the  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)— in alignment with the complementary recommendation  4.1.2, Expand and Support the National Institute of  Standards and Technology Security Work—to facilitate  robust and integrated U.S. participation from the federal  government, academia, professional societies, and industry  in forums setting ICT standards. To participate more effec tively, the U.S. government should send not only technical  and standards experts but also diplomats.  
Government and the private sector can work together to  promote U.S. values in the face of standards that would  
50 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
otherwise advance authoritarian ideals. The proposed  National Cyber Director (NCD) should serve as the cen tral coordination point among U.S.-based actors contrib uting to standards bodies. To preserve the integrity of the  standards process, each actor—public, private, academic,  and so on—must represent only their own opinion, but  the NCD can help align those opinions to advocate for  standards that promote a free and open internet. The  NCD should consider encouraging U.S. business leaders  to participate and collaborate in ICT standards forums  to ensure the unified promotion of the most technically  secure standards in the private sector.  
Contributions to standards forums can be effective and  meaningful only when members trust that all are contrib uting technically sound proposals in good faith. The best  demonstration of good faith that the United States can  give is to implement at home the agreed-on international  standards. Accordingly, executive branch departments  and agencies should, as a matter of regular practice, seek  out and whenever practicable implement internation ally agreed-on standards rather than those developed  domestically.  
2.1.3 Improve Cyber Capacity Building and  Consolidate the Funding of Cyber Foreign  Assistance  
The U.S. government should assist allied and part ner countries and organizations to build their cyber  capacities. U.S. national security is improved if the  capacity of our allies and partners to prevent, manage,  and recover from cyberattacks is improved. Moreover,  U.S. adversaries are using U.S. partner countries as test  beds for cyber operations that could be used against the  United States in the future. Bolstering the capacity of  these partners helps stymie adversaries seeking to test  and refine cyber weapons. Capacity-building efforts  should involve the Department of State as well as the  United States Agency for International Development  (USAID), Department of Justice (DOJ), Department  of the Treasury, International Development Finance  Corporation (DFC), Department of Homeland  
STRENGTHEN NORMS AND NON-MILITARY TOOLS 
Security (DHS), and other relevant U.S. government  entities. 
Combating cybercrime, which is almost never an exclu sively domestic issue, would particularly benefit from  building cyber capacity. Cooperation between countries  and agencies is critical to effectively combating the  threat. The U.S. government should facilitate additional  partnerships with foreign law enforcement agencies and  better incorporate interagency investigative teams within  the overall U.S. strategic approach. Partnerships, such as  that between the U.S. Secret Service, the Dutch National  High Tech Crime Unit, and the Federal Bureau of  Investigation’s (FBI) Five Eyes cyber task force, should be  fully supported and provided with additional resources.  In addition, the U.S. government should expand its  training programs for foreign law enforcement partners,  such as through the Department of State’s International  Law Enforcement Academy (ILEA). These types of  training programs dramatically enhance the capabilities  of indispensable partners and allow for the kind of joint  investigations necessary to combat a fundamentally  transnational adversary. 
Congress should consolidate the Department of State’s  foreign assistance funding to facilitate these efforts. A  new funding line in the State, Foreign Operations, and  Related Programs (SFOPS) appropriations legislation  should be created specifically dedicated to building  cyber capacity. The creation of this line item would have  no initial impact on the Department of State’s budget,  as funding would be reallocated from other accounts.  However, Congress should also consider increasing the  budget for building cyber capacity, especially to countries  that are being targeted by our adversaries.  
2.1.4 Improve International Tools for Law  Enforcement Activities in Cyberspace 
Law enforcement tools like criminal indictments and  international extraditions contribute to layered cyber  deterrence by signaling the difference between responsible  and unacceptable behavior in cyberspace, thereby helping 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 51 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
to reinforce norms. Law enforcement activities also  provide fruitful ground on which to work with interna tional partners and allies to hold adversaries accountable.  Improving the United States’ ability to support other  governments’ law enforcement efforts enhances the  overall effectiveness of norms in cyberspace. 
Improve the MLAT/MLAA Process: Mutual Legal  Assistance Treaties (MLATs) and Mutual Legal Assistance  Agreements (MLAAs) are tools that enable U.S. law  enforcement to prosecute cybercriminals. Having a  streamlined MLAT/MLAA process assists with tasks such  as attribution and extradition. Stronger U.S. alliances  in cyberspace and more efficient MLATs/MLAAs help  reduce the number of safe havens from which mali cious cyber actors can act with impunity. To make the  MLAT/MLAA process more efficient, Congress should  take several actions. It should provide DOJ’s Office  of International Affairs with administrative subpoena  authority, which would expedite MLAT/MLAA pro cessing by bypassing the need to execute hundreds of  court orders to obtain basic subscriber information. In  addition, Congress should provide funding to the FBI to  help automate the execution of MLAT/MLAA-related  search warrants. In fiscal year 2019, the FBI executed 461  communication service provider (CSP) search warrants.  These warrant executions required reviewing and filtering  834 accounts and, in 95 cases, the translation of materials  from a total of 28 different languages.180 
Increase the Number of FBI Cyber ALATs: Congress should  create and fund 12 additional FBI Cyber Assistant Legal  Attachés (ALATs) to facilitate intelligence sharing and  help coordinate joint cyber operations. There are cur rently 10 ALATs; increasing the total number to 22 will  help meet the required demand. These technically trained  agents can also assist foreign counterparts by demon strating investigative best practices in cyber cases. ALATs’  overseas position gives them unique insight into emerg ing threats and the tactics, techniques, and procedures  of particular adversaries. Congress should also consider  increasing funding for other federal law enforcement  
agencies to coordinate with foreign law enforcement on  cyber investigations.  
2.1.5 Leverage Sanctions and Trade  Enforcement Actions 
The U.S. government can better punish cyber aggressors  and signal U.S. intent toward potential attackers when it  leverages its tools of economic statecraft as a component  of a multipronged enforcement strategy. However, the  
efficacy of sanctions depends heavily on a number of  factors, including their target and timeline, the degree  of international coordination, and the path to lifting  them. The European Union (EU) has already begun to  bolster its commitment to using sanctions to deter and  respond to cyberattacks through the 2019 EU cyber  sanctions regime, which includes banning violators from  traveling to the EU and freezing their assets.181 With this  framework in mind, the United States should join the  international community in strengthening its dedication  to using economic sanctions, when possible and appro priate, against those who conduct cyberattacks on the  U.S. electoral process and infrastructure. 
Congress should codify into law Executive Order 13848,  “Executive Order on Imposing Certain Sanctions in  the Event of Foreign Interference in a United States  Election.” Congress has already codified Executive  Order 13694, “Blocking the Property of Certain Persons  Engaging in Significant Malicious Cyber-Enabled  Activities,” as a part of the Countering America’s  Adversaries Through Sanctions Act (CAATSA).  
Furthermore, in cases dealing with unfair trade practices  carried out via cyber means, the Office of the United States  Trade Representative should consider taking action under  Section 301 of the Trade Act of 1974, and the Department  of Commerce should consider using the Entity List—part  of the Export Administration Regulations—to impose fur ther requirements. Special care should be taken to ensure  that designation under Section 301 is not used in response  to cases unrelated to trade.
52 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
2.1.6 Improve Attribution Analysis and the  Attribution-Decision Rubric 
Accurate and timely attribution of a cyber incident  enables U.S. leaders to make the most informed deci sions to protect the country through consideration of  appropriate response actions in order to enforce norms of  accountability in cyberspace.  
The Office of the Director of National Intelligence  (ODNI), in partnership with the private sector through  DHS and the FBI, should improve attribution analy sis. This can be achieved by (1) standardizing ODNI’s  Attribution Guidelines and assessment timeline; (2)  establishing an attribution analysis working group (not  standing but designated), which should include key  private-sector analysis and data to accelerate the federal  government’s response; and (3) advancing analytic  capabilities by applying emerging technologies and  diversifying data sources to overcome evolving techni cal challenges. Recommendation 1.4.1, “Codify and  Strengthen the Cyber Threat Intelligence Integration  Center,” further supports this recommendation by  strengthening the aggregation and deconfliction entity for  assessing attribution.  
In addition, the National Security Council and the  NCD, in consultation with the ODNI, should develop  an attribution-decision rubric. The purpose of the rubric  is to clarify available responses that should be made based  on attribution at some minimally required level of confi dence. The NSC should appoint an entity to implement  the rubric. Even when a cyber incident lacks high-confi dence attribution, the rubric will enable the U.S. gov ernment to reduce vulnerabilities and take appropriate  actions by matching attribution levels to deliverable  non-military instruments of state power. When necessary,  the U.S. government must be comfortable responding  with appropriate actions (i.e., policy decisions) without  requiring that a specific level of confidence be present. 
STRENGTHEN NORMS AND NON-MILITARY TOOLS 
2.1.7 Reinvigorate Efforts to Develop Cyber  Confidence-Building Measures (CBMs)  The Department of State should reinvigorate the devel opment and exercise of bilateral and multilateral cyber  confidence-building measures (CBMs). Cyber CBMs  are nonbinding, cooperative arrangements and actions  that reassure allies, signal adversaries, and demonstrate  intent, such as maintaining appropriate points of  contact for incident response and emergency hotlines.  Cyber CBMs can and should be implemented in con cert with the updated National Cyber Strategy. In their  current format, CBMs can be used to mitigate risks that  relationships between cyber actors will become unstable,  thereby helping to avoid crises. Over time, CBMs can  also be used as a foundation for the future development  of arms-control regimes. Moreover, CBMs can help  bolster the development of norms. Recommendation  1.1.1, “Develop a Multitiered Signaling Strategy,” is an  example of how a CBM can be applied, by providing  clarity to adversaries, partners, and allies on how the  United States intends to act.  
The Department of State should continue to develop  and implement both regional and global cyber CBMs,  together with non-state stakeholders such as pri vate-sector entities.182 Specifically, the Department of  State should build on the CBMs enumerated in the  2015 Report of the UN GGE and Decision Document  No. 1202 (2016) of the OSCE in the Field of  
Information and Telecommunications in the Context  of International Security.183 The U.S. government  should actively implement CBMs, coordinated by the  National Cyber Director, that account for the unique  attributes and dynamics of the cyber domain. These  CBMs can help actors share information, mitigate  uncertainty, create lines of communication that can  restrain unwanted escalation in emergencies and crises,  and facilitate crisis management, thereby promoting  stability between states.
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 53 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE
Resilience—the capacity to withstand and quickly  
recover from attacks that could compel, deter,  or otherwise shape U.S. behavior—is a foundational  element of layered cyber deterrence, ensuring that critical  functions and the full extent of U.S. power remain avail able in peacetime and are preserved in crisis. It denies  adversaries benefits by reducing the chances that their  attacks can achieve strategic objectives or have strategic  consequences.184 National security, economic security,  public health and safety, and the integrity of our political  system are all elements of national strength and stability  that must be preserved. However, as the United States  has become more technologically advanced, the systems  and assets—or critical infrastructure—that support these  elements of national power have come under increasing  risk of cyberattack, placing their continued function in  jeopardy.185 To enhance the nation’s overall resilience, this  pillar focuses on three strategic objectives. 
First, national resilience efforts fundamentally depend on  the ability of the United States to accurately and compre hensively understand, assess, and manage risk across the  critical infrastructure ecosystem.186 To better understand  risk at a national level, the United States should clarify  and codify the roles played by sector-specific agencies  and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency  in working together and with the private sector to  gather and assess risk information on an ongoing basis.  However, addressing national risk cannot stop there. The  U.S. government must also institutionalize and routinize  a process to regularly build an understanding of how the  risks of different sectors come together and to translate  this understanding into a multiyear strategy, priorities,  and a budget for U.S. government and private-sector  efforts. By understanding, assessing, and managing  
national risk, the United States will be in a better position  to diminish both the incidences and the consequences  of attempts by adversaries to erode the integrity of the  elements of America’s national strength. 
Second, national resilience requires sufficient national  capacity and preparedness to respond to and recover from  attacks when they do happen, ensuring continuity of  critical functions where possible and quickly restarting  where not. The United States has well-established mech anisms and processes to respond to physical and natural  disasters. The same rigor has not yet been applied to  understanding and responding to cyber states of distress  and disasters. Doing so requires planning and exercising  to guarantee that the U.S. government and private sector  are coordinated in response to significant and potentially  catastrophic cyber incidents. It also means ensuring  that the U.S. government is equipped with the requisite  authorities, capabilities, and resources to meaningfully  aid in response and recovery should the time come that  they are required. 
Third, Americans’ trust in the political system, and in the  democratic institutions that underpin it, remains a foun dational element of national resilience. Our recent past has  shown that our democratic institutions represent a soft and  attractive target for malicious actors seeking to under mine the American peoples’ trust in the integrity of our  democracy. Building a truly resilient America in the face of  growing cyber threats means ensuring that the cornerstones  of our democracy are impervious to these threats. To do  so, we must update the way we both approach the security  of our election systems and campaigns and harden the  American people against the malign influence of adversar ies who wish to subvert them.  
54 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #1:  
UNDERSTAND, ASSESS, AND MANAGE NATIONAL RISK 
The U.S. government should build the necessary structures and processes to continuously understand,  assess, and manage national-level cyber risk across the critical infrastructure ecosystem. Owners and  operators of critical infrastructure are not always fully aware of the risk they inherit, the risk they own, the  risk they pass on, and, more relevant to the federal government, the risk they bear for national security,  economic security, and public health and safety. Creating an accurate picture of “national risk” has thus far  eluded the U.S. government and the private sector working independently, and the United States should  focus on strengthening the public-private mechanisms for both understanding and mitigating national risk  in areas where such mitigation is most critical. 
Key Recommendation 
3.1 Congress should codify responsibilities and ensure sufficient resources for the Cybersecurity  and Infrastructure Security Agency (CISA) and sector-specific agencies (SSAs) in the identification,  assessment, and management of national and sector-specific risk. 
Led by the Department of Homeland Security (DHS)  and the Cybersecurity and Infrastructure Security Agency  (CISA), critical infrastructure resilience and national  risk management rely on a complex system of partner ships with the private sector and a number of agencies  across the federal government. While empowering  CISA is a critical step in building national resilience,  the executive branch must also take steps to strengthen  sector-specific agencies (SSAs). As defined in Presidential  Policy Directive 21, SSAs manage much of the day-to day engagement between the federal government and  private-sector entities within a given critical infrastruc ture sector. National resilience requires that each of  these agencies is able to identify, assess, and support the  private sector in managing risks within the sector under  its charge and to contribute to managing risks at the  national level, where cross-sector risks—both physical  and cyber—can be identified and controlled over time.  However, there are significant imbalances and inconsis tencies in both the capacity and the willingness of these  agencies to manage sector-specific risks and participate in  government-wide efforts. In addition, the lack of clarity  and consistency concerning the responsibilities and  
requirements for these agencies, both within their sectors  and in their relations with CISA, continues to cause con fusion, redundancy, and gaps in resilience efforts. It also  
confounds the efforts of Congress, or overseeing depart ments and agencies, to hold these agencies accountable.  These features reveal significant limitations in the U.S.  government’s ability to comprehensively understand and  mitigate national risk. 
Congress should codify SSAs into law as “Sector Risk  Management Agencies”; establish responsibilities and  requirements for identifying, assessing, and assisting in  managing risk for the critical infrastructure sectors under  their purview; and appropriate the respective agency’s  funds necessary to carry out these responsibilities.187 As  a corresponding measure, Congress should recognize  CISA’s lead role in national risk management and the  functions of the National Risk Management Center.  This legislation should clarify roles and responsibilities  between these agencies assisting in managing sector-spe cific risks and CISA. To alleviate the issue of inconsistent  maturity, this codification should provide the resources  necessary for both agencies assisting in managing 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 55 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
sector-specific risks and CISA to implement their respon sibilities for their sectors and act as mature, steadfast  partners in overall national resilience efforts. The ability  of the federal government to scale up its efforts and  advance a deeper collaboration with the private sector  on cybersecurity and resilience fundamentally depends  on guiding SSAs to maturity, ensuring their consistency  across sectors, and empowering them to represent their  sectors and fully integrate with national risk management  efforts led by CISA, with the supporting efforts of the  U.S. intelligence community.  
Designation of Sector Risk Management Agencies: As part  of this codification, Congress should direct the U.S.  government, in a process led by DHS, to review the  current critical infrastructure model, propose revisions  based on an updated understanding of risk, and revise  the National Infrastructure Protection Plan in accordance  with proposed changes. The updated model should form  the basis for one or more presidential determinations that  designate a primary Sector Risk Management Agency  aligned with each sector. This presidential determination  would act as the mechanism by which newly codified  responsibilities and authorities are assigned or delegated  to departments and agencies with commensurate funds to  fulfill those duties. 
Risk Identification and Assessment: In a process led by  CISA and codified in a “National Risk Management  Cycle” (recommendation 3.1.1), Sector Risk  Management Agencies should have the responsibility  and be empowered to identify and assess risk within their  critical infrastructure sectors, both to inform their own  programs and to participate in the more general work  of CISA’s cross-sector risk identification and assessment.  Congress should ensure that the information necessary to  inform this process, such as common interdependencies  and vulnerabilities, is protected from public disclosure. 
Intelligence Needs Identification and Assessment: In a process  led by the Office of Director of National Intelligence and  CISA, as suggested in recommendation 5.1.1, Sector Risk  
Management Agencies should have the responsibility and  be empowered to work with industry, including sector-co ordinating councils, and information sharing and analysis  centers to identify common intelligence gaps and areas of  critical risk or vulnerability so that the intelligence com 
munity can provide actionable, focused intelligence. 
Sector Risk Management Agency Audit and Scorecard:  Congress should additionally direct the Office of  Management and Budget, in coordination with CISA,  to establish a process to evaluate the performance of each  Sector Risk Management Agency in driving down the  risk in its respective sector. This assessment will include,  but not be limited to, how each agency implements the  “Critical Infrastructure Resilience Strategy” (described  in recommendation 3.1.1) and participates in activities  prescribed by CISA in the National Risk Management  Cycle. This assessment should include the perspective of  the private sector and sector-coordinating councils, and  be made available to Congress yearly. Each agency head  will be responsible for providing a report on the adequacy  and effectiveness of its programs and activities in fulfilling  the strategy and priorities, as well as any other relevant  information requested by the Directors of the Office of  Management and Budget and CISA.  
Cyber Incident Response, Management, and Coordination: Government agencies mounting incident response and  technical assistance efforts, such as CISA, the Federal  Bureau of Investigation (FBI), and, within its authority,  the Department of Defense (DoD), should be required  to notify Sector Risk Management Agencies when cyber  incidents affect an entity within their sector, unless  precluded from doing so by a legal constraint or by con siderations of operational sensitivity. This process ensures  that such efforts can benefit from the unique insight and  expertise that Sector Risk Management Agencies provide,  as well as ensure that each Sector Risk Management  Agency maintains situational awareness of its sector. This  requirement should be protected from public disclosure,  with penalties associated with inappropriate disclosure to  regulatory or non-federal entities.
56 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
Centralized Programmatic Support to Sector-Specific  Agencies: Congress should, in coordination with the  Office of Management and Budget and relevant depart ments and agencies, appropriate funds for shared-ser vice programs to enable CISA to support Sector Risk  Management Agencies. These would include shared  services, common programs, and foundational tools used  by Sector Risk Management Agencies and provided or  managed by CISA. This approach will help enable these  agencies in their mission, provide consistent private sec tor–focused programs and approaches across the federal  government, reduce redundancy, and ensure that certain  services, like information sharing, can benefit from  economies of scale and best practices. 
Enabling Recommendations 
3.1.1 Establish a Five-Year National Risk  Management Cycle Culminating in a Critical  Infrastructure Resilience Strategy  
Critical infrastructure resilience requires the United States  to be able to develop a comprehensive understanding  of national risk and to translate that understanding into  resources to manage or minimize that risk over time.  These activities should be cyclical, mutually supporting,  and routinely exercised, so that the government gains an  ever-evolving understanding of a shifting risk landscape  and adjusts its programs and priorities to follow suit.  While the U.S. government has made great strides at  understanding national risk by concentrating on how  national critical functions work and applying that under standing to its priorities and programs, significant lim itations remain. The U.S. government still lacks rigorous,  codified, and routinely exercised processes for identifying,  assessing, and prioritizing critical infrastructure risks  across the federal government and between the public  and private sectors. In areas where critical infrastructure  risks have been identified, risk management efforts have  been further limited by annual funding of programs  rather than the stable, multiyear funding necessary to  fully minimize that risk over time. 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
To address this shortcoming, Congress should direct  the executive branch to establish a five-year National  Risk Management Cycle that culminates in a Critical  
Infrastructure Resilience Strategy. This strategy would  then be implemented, and adjusted as necessary, in the  following five-year cycle. Through this five-year risk man agement cycle, the federal government would identify  and assess national risk, implement plans for managing or  mitigating that risk, and update national critical func tions. Specifically: 
• Congress should direct the executive branch to  conduct an initial two-year risk identification  and assessment of critical infrastructure based on  currently defined national critical functions. The  results would inform the first Critical Infrastructure  Resilience Strategy, to be delivered in the initial two  years and every five years thereafter. 
• Congress should also direct the executive branch  to establish processes and procedures to establish a  five-year National Risk Management Cycle, includ ing defining procedures for identifying, assessing,  and prioritizing risks and translating this under standing into strategy, budget, and programmatic  priorities for relevant departments and agencies.  These processes and procedures should be made in  consultation with private industries, posted publicly  and made available for public comment, and be  adaptive and iterative to account for lessons learned  from previous cycles. 
• Risk identification and assessments formed in the  cycle should directly inform and culminate in a  Critical Infrastructure Resilience Strategy, which  will set programmatic and budgetary priorities to be  implemented in the following five-year National Risk  Management Cycle. 
• These activities should provide quantitative and  qualitative data to inform the National Cybersecurity  Assistance Fund (recommendation 3.1.2),  
Continuity of the Economy planning (recommen dation 3.2), and the U.S. government’s resilience  and preparedness programs and should be informed, 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 57 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
guided, and updated through regular exercises, such  as the Biennial National Cyber Tabletop Exercise  (recommendation 3.3.5).  
3.1.2 Establish a National Cybersecurity  Assistance Fund to Ensure Consistent and  Timely Funding for Initiatives That Underpin  National Resilience  
While the Homeland Security Grant Program and  resourcing for national preparedness under the Federal  Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) are well-es tablished,188 the U.S. government has no equivalent for  cybersecurity preparation or prevention. The lack of a  consistent, resourced fund for investing in resilience in  key areas inhibits the U.S. government from conveying  its understanding of risk into strategy, planning, and  action in furtherance of core objectives for the security  and resilience of critical infrastructure.  
To address this shortcoming, Congress should pass a  law establishing a National Cybersecurity Assistance  Fund for projects and programs aimed at systematically  increasing the resilience of public and private entities,  thereby increasing the overall resilience of the United  States. Grant programs organized under this fund would  be, depending on purpose, available to public or private  entities. 
• The fund should be used only for solutions, projects,  and programs for which (1) there is a clearly defined,  critical risk to be mitigated, (2) market forces do not  provide sufficient private-sector incentives to miti 
gate the risk without government investment, and  (3) there is clear federal need, role, and responsibility  to mitigate the risk.  
• The fund would be administered by FEMA and  directed by CISA in coordination with Sector Risk  Management Agencies, and would be authorized and  appropriated for 10 years. 
• DHS would be required to submit a yearly report  updating Congress on new programs established  under the fund and on the progress of existing  programs. 
• The fund should have sufficient flexibility to be used  in instances in which timely resilience or security  investment would neutralize or substantially mitigate  an overriding, serious threat to national security,  economic security, or public health and safety. 
• Grants provided to state, local, tribal, and territorial  (SLTT) entities under this fund should require 10  percent matching funds in the first year of its estab lishment, to be increased every subsequent year by 10  percent until 50 percent matching funds are required.  Grants would require 50 percent matching funds  every year thereafter to minimize moral hazard.
58 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #2:  
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
ENSURE NATIONAL CAPACITY TO RESPOND TO AND RECOVER  FROM A SIGNIFICANT CYBER INCIDENT 
The United States should establish a national capacity to respond to and recover from a significant cyber  event, and provide the government with the authorities necessary to ensure economic continuity and  cyber resilience—in partnership with the owners and operators of public- and private-sector critical  infrastructure. National resilience requires the nation to be sufficiently prepared to respond to and recover  from attacks, sustain critical functions even under degraded conditions, and, in some cases, restart critical  functionality after disruption—man-made or not. While the U.S. government maintains robust processes  and mechanisms to respond to and recover from physical disasters or national emergencies through  Continuity of Operations, Continuity of Government, and FEMA operations, there are gaps in other  areas. The 2017 National Security Strategy identifies economic security as national security, but there are  no comparably robust continuity mechanisms and planning efforts in place to ensure a rapid restart and  recovery of the national economy in the event of a truly catastrophic disruption. In addition, the U.S.  government faces both institutional and resource limitations in its ability to assist the private sector and  SLTT governments in the prevention of, response to, and recovery from a significant cyber incident that  falls below the level that would elicit an emergency declaration. 
Key Recommendation 
3.2 Congress should direct the executive branch to develop and maintain Continuity of the  Economy planning in consultation with the private sector to ensure the continuous operation of  critical functions of the economy in the event of a significant cyber disruption. 
While Continuity of Operations and Continuity of  Government have long been cornerstones of government  contingency planning, no equivalent effort exists to ensure  the rapid restart and recovery of the U.S. economy after  a major disruption.189 Such disruptions could include an  attack on major stock exchanges, an electronic-magnetic  pulse event, a regional disruption of power, or any other  attack that compromises the national conveyance of goods  or services. In developing and conducting Continuity of  the Economy planning, the United States should focus  its efforts on maintaining the continuity of national- or  international-level distribution or exchange of goods and  services, on which U.S. economic strength and public  confidence are founded. While disruption of these regional  or local mechanisms may have consequences of their own,  existing resilience and recovery efforts can often account  
for, respond to, and mitigate localized effects. However,  disruption of upstream, national-level mechanisms in  many sectors—including bulk power distribution, stock  exchanges, wholesale payments, medicine, telecommu nications, and trade or logistics—would have cascading  effects downstream, creating further failures at regional  and local levels and causing shortages that would hamper  U.S. response, recovery, and mobilization efforts. Should  a significant cyber event occur during wartime, military  readiness and mobilization would be significantly hin dered. Moreover, long-term disruptions to core economic  functions would undermine the United States’ interna tional standing, credibility, and appeal in an increasingly  competitive global marketplace. Creating and exercising a  Continuity of the Economy plan will serve as a deterrent  to adversaries by demonstrating that the United States  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 59 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
has the wherewithal to respond and remain resilient to a  significant cyberattack. 
Congress should direct the executive branch to develop  and maintain Continuity of the Economy planning to  ensure continuous operation of critical functions of the  economy in the event of a significant cyber disruption.  
The planning process should include the Department of  Homeland Security, Department of Defense, Department  of Commerce, Department of the Treasury, Department  of Energy, and any other departments or agencies as  determined by the President. The executive branch should  report back to Congress on the status of its planning effort  within one year and provide updates to Congress on a  yearly basis thereafter. As part of the planning process,  the executive branch should determine any additional  authorities or resources that would be required to imple ment plans in the case of a disaster or for the establishment  of programs that support and maintain department  and agency planning capabilities for Continuity of the  Economy efforts. In forming or updating Continuity of  the Economy planning, the executive branch should draw  on insights from the National Risk Management Cycle  and planning should inform the Critical Infrastructure  Resilience Strategy (recommendation 3.1.1). 
Analyze National Critical Functions: A Continuity of the  Economy plan should focus on the national-level distri bution of goods and services necessary for the reliable  economic functioning of the United States. Leveraging  work on the national critical functions already in devel opment, the plan should outline the key private-sector  entities that constitute or are integral to these distribution  mechanisms and bear primary responsibility in main taining and operating them for sectors, regions, or the  economy as a whole. These key mechanisms include, but  are not limited to, the following: 
• Bulk power and electric distribution systems.  • National or international financial exchanges, includ ing wholesale payments, stocks, monetary exchanges,  and payment clearing and settlement systems. • National or international communications networks,  data hosting, and cloud services. 
• Interstate oil and natural gas pipelines. 
• National-level trade and logistics, including maritime  shipping, interstate railways, and airline cargo.  
Prioritize Response and Recovery: The plan should establish a  framework for rapidly restarting and recovering core func tions in a crisis. Using a schema for setting priorities similar  to those used for Continuity of Operations and Continuity  of Government, the plan should give precedence to func tions whose disruption could cause catastrophic economic  loss, lead to runaway loss of public confidence, imperil  human life on a national scale, or undermine response,  recovery, or mobilization efforts in a crisis. The plan should  also outline standard operating procedures for plan activa tion, execution, and implementation. 
Identify Areas for Investments in Resilience: Continuity of  the Economy planning should identify areas where risk of  disruption is so catastrophic that establishment of secure,  separate critical systems, including analog or retro systems,  would be an effective use of resources. Continuity of the  Economy planning should further review the feasibility of  “disconnecting,” or air gapping, critical services or specific  industrial control networks if national security concerns  overwhelm the need for internet connectivity. Finally, this  work should emphasize the importance of developing plans  to mitigate the consequences of successful cyberattacks. 
Identify Areas for Preserving Data: Continuity of the  Economy planning should identify critical segments  of the economy where particular data, preserved in a  
protected, verified, and uncorrupted format, would be  required to quickly restart the economy in the face of  disruption or significant cyberattack. The United States  should further explore options to store backup, protected  data across borders with allies or partners, particularly in  areas where economic disruption in either country could  have cascading effects on the global economy. 
Identify Key Materials, Goods, and Services: The executive  branch should consider whether to include a list of  raw materials, industrial goods, and key services whose  absence would significantly undermine the ability of 
60 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
the United States to avoid or recover from an economic  collapse and a recommendation as to whether the United  States should maintain a strategic reserve of those materi als, goods, and services. 
Extend Credit: The executive branch should also con sider mechanisms, when presented with a declaration  of national emergency by the President, to ensure the  extension of credit to key participants in the national  
economy when such credit would be necessary to avoid  catastrophic economic collapse or would allow the recov ery from such a collapse. Such mechanisms could include  authorizing the Department of the Treasury or the  Federal Open Market Committee to extend the credit of  the United States to these entities for their rapid recovery. 
Key Recommendation 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
Expand Education and Readiness of the General Public: By its very nature, Continuity of the Economy plan ning will prioritize the most essential functions of our  country—and their locales—both to enable a rapid  recovery from a devastating cyberattack and to preserve  the strength and will to quickly punish the attacker.  Many industries will not be included in this planning,  and most citizens will not be able to rely on govern ment assistance in the period following such an attack.  But as is also true of natural disaster preparedness, the  American people do not need to be helpless. DHS and  other relevant agencies should expand citizen prepared ness efforts and public awareness mechanisms to be  ready for such an event. 
3.3 Congress should codify a “Cyber State of Distress” tied to a “Cyber Response and Recovery  Fund” to ensure sufficient resources and capacity to respond to significant cyber incidents. 
Though FEMA mechanisms may be available to aid  response to and recovery from a cyber incident that  approaches the level of a natural disaster, few cyber  
incidents are likely to cross that threshold.190 Current  mechanisms for cyber incident response, outlined under  Presidential Policy Directive 41 and detailed in the  National Cyber Incident Response Plan, do not empower  federal agencies with additional authority, funding, or  resources to respond to or aid non-federal entities even  when a “significant cyber incident” designation has been  made. The absence of such empowerment remains a key  check on the U.S. government’s ability to ensure appro priate capacity, support, and organization in its response  to cyber incidents.  
To address this shortcoming, Congress should pass a law  codifying a “Cyber State of Distress”—a federal declaration  that would trigger the availability of additional resources  through a “Cyber Response and Recovery Fund”—to assist  SLTT governments and the private sector beyond what  
is available through conventional technical assistance and  cyber incident response programs. The declaration would  be used exclusively for responding to, or preemptively  preparing for, cyber incidents whose significance is above  “routine” but below what would trigger an emergency  declaration and for incidents that exceed or are expected  to exceed the capacity of federal civilian authorities to  effectively support critical infrastructure in response and  recovery. The fund would be used to augment or scale up  government technical assistance and incident response  efforts in support of public and private critical infrastruc ture. A key provision is the inclusion of preemptive action  and preparation, which accounts for instances when the  federal government has a reasonable expectation that a  significant cyber incident is likely to occur and preemptive  action and preparation would reduce potential conse quences of disruption or compromise. 
Threshold for State of Distress Declaration: The declaration  should be made in response to or in anticipation of a  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 61 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
“significant cyber incident,” or one that is (or group of  related cyber incidents that together are) likely to result  in demonstrable harm to the national security interests,  foreign relations, or economy of the United States or to  
the public confidence, civil liberties, or public health and  safety of the American people. Such cyber incidents could  include a coordinated campaign of multiple, individual  incidents occurring over time that are not significant on  their own but collectively yield significant consequences. A  major consideration for making this declaration should be  when an incident or series of incidents exceeds the capacity  of civil authorities to effectively aid the private sector and  SLTT in preparation, response, or recovery. 
Incident Response Coordination and Management: The dec laration would invoke current authority that establishes  
Is Our Water Supply (Cyber) Secure? 
the Secretary of Homeland Security as principal federal  official responsible for coordinating incident response,  recovery, and management efforts on behalf of the entire  federal government. In addition to covering response and  recovery efforts, this coordination would need to account  for, and protect, law enforcement interests, including  the preservation of forensic data necessary to attribute  the attack and enable subsequent investigations by law  enforcement agencies. This coordination role should not  supersede other existing department and agency authori ties or direct law enforcement activity. 
Disbursement of a Cyber Response and Recovery Fund: Congress should establish and appropriate funds to main tain a Cyber Response and Recovery Fund, administered by  FEMA and directed by CISA. Disbursement would be 
Every American, every day, depends on a supply of clean water. Yet most Americans would be surprised to learn that even  though water is critical in our daily lives, and even though our water supply is known to be a target for malign actors, water  utilities remain largely ill-prepared to defend their networks from cyber-enabled disruption.191 
The U.S. water supply is operated by nearly 70,000 utilities192 that are turning to digital networks to manage real-world physical  processes critical to water treatment and distribution—but these utilities are approaching this transition with dramatic varia tions in capacity and sophistication. Like our electoral system, this distributed network can provide a measure of resilience.  Also like our electoral system, it can limit the effectiveness of federal action and slow the deployment of best practices or the  responsible incorporation of secure technologies. Gaps in utilities’ network configurations, insecure remote access systems,  and outdated training regimes are just a few of the vectors through which Americans’ water infrastructure is vulnerable to  cyber-enabled exploitation.193 Malign actors have already attempted to breach water infrastructure systems, and they could  eventually exploit these vulnerabilities to disrupt or contaminate the American water supply.194 
Compounding these problems, municipal utilities often lack the resources or capacity to address these weaknesses. In part nership with the Department of Homeland Security, federal sector-specific agencies (SSAs) and state and local governments  are currently responsible for managing and securing American utilities. For water, the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA)  is the principal federal agency responsible for cyber risk management.195 In practice, however, SSA responsibilities are unclear,  and that uncertainty contributes to insufficient coordination between the EPA and other stakeholders in water utilities’ security,  as well as to cybersecurity funding requests that lack the resources and buy-in necessary for success. 
These shortcomings imperil the cybersecurity that is vital to the water infrastructure, which in turn is vital to our lives. Codifying  SSA responsibilities, ensuring that SSAs such as the EPA conduct their risk management assignments effectively, and better  enabling state and local governments are all critical steps toward improving the capacity of water utilities to prevent and  mitigate the growing threats they face from cyberspace.
62 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
triggered when a Cyber State of Distress is declared. The  funds would not be used for direct financial assistance to  affected entities but to increase, scale up, or augment the  capabilities of federal civil authorities to provide technical  
assistance and incident response. This would include  enabling standby contracts with private-sector cybersecurity  services or incident responders and funding DoD personnel  operating under Defense Support to Civil Authorities. 
Enabling Recommendations 
3.3.1 Designate Responsibilities for  Cybersecurity Services under the Defense  Production Act 
The Defense Production Act provides the U.S. govern ment with expansive authorities to prioritize resources  in the event of a natural or man-made disaster, military  conflict, or act of terrorism within the United States.  However, the most recent executive order pertaining to  the act, Executive Order 13603, neither accounts for nor  designates responsibilities for “cybersecurity services,”  including private-sector incident response. These author ities can be better leveraged to provide a more optimal  allocation of resources to ensure sufficient capacity for  protection against, response to, and recovery from a sig nificant cyber incident. This would empower the United  States to better understand and allocate resources for pri vate-sector reserve capacity and procure standby contracts  that could be triggered by a significant cyber incident  or by an incident that exceeds the federal government’s  capacity to respond. 
To take full advantage of the Defense Production Act for  cybersecurity issues, the President should issue or amend  an executive order that prioritizes and designates respon 
sibility for “cybersecurity services.” This would enhance  the U.S. government’s ability to rapidly mobilize the  private sector in response to a significant cyber incident.  This order should ensure that the U.S. government makes  all necessary preparations to understand and address gaps  in private-sector incident response capacity and prioriti zation in assisting critical infrastructure in responding to  and recovering from a significant cyber incident. 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
• The executive order should designate DHS as the lead  agency to identify cybersecurity-related services that  are essential to national security and assess the capacity  of these services to support national security needs. 
• Under Title VII of the Defense Production Act, the  U.S. government should convene the cybersecurity  incident response industry to understand the full  capacity of their services in steady-state as compared  to the capacity that would be required for significant  cyber incidents and catastrophic scenarios that have  real-world consequences.  
• Using this information, the U.S. government can  procure standby contracts with cybersecurity incident  responders under Title III of the Defense Production  Act, which would be triggered for additional assistance  in cyber response and recovery efforts in response to a  significant or catastrophic cyber incident. 
3.3.2 Clarify Liability for Federally Directed  Mitigation, Response, and Recovery Efforts If the United States were to suffer a significant cyber inci dent, the federal government would undoubtedly require  the assistance of private-sector partners in response and  recovery. Existing laws to facilitate these activities, such as  the Defense Production Act and Federal Power Act, are  limited in their ability to provide reliable liability protec tions for private-sector entities or public utilities that take  action, or refrain from taking action, at the direction of  the federal government. Because of this lack of protec tion, private-sector entities or public utilities fearing legal  liability and lawsuits may be reluctant to cooperate with  the government.  
To address this concern, Congress should pass a law  specifying that entities taking, or refraining from taking,  action at the duly authorized direction of any agency  head, or any other federal official authorized by law,  should be insulated from legal liability. Covered actions  should include any request or order by relevant federal  agencies issued to protect against or respond to an  emergency or threat relating to a cybersecurity incident  impacting national security. 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 63 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
3.3.3 Improve and Expand Planning Capacity  and Readiness for Cyber Incident Response  and Recovery Efforts 
Prior planning is critical for government readiness in  responding to and recovering from a significant cyber  event. Congress should increase planning capacity  within DHS to enable the preparation, review, and  updating of key planning documents, standard operat ing procedures, standby contracts, and nondisclosure  agreements necessary for putting into operation plans  for cyber incident response and recovery. This planning  should allow for immediate execution of response plans  and mechanisms during a crisis; take into account  national, regional, and SLTT implications; and incorpo rate and empower Cyber State of Distress declarations,  the Cyber Response and Recovery Fund (recommen dation 3.3), and Continuity of the Economy planning  (recommendation 3.2). Planning should encompass  entities that are critical to response and recovery efforts  (e.g., private-sector entities, sector-specific agencies,  SLTT governments, and international partners).196 These planning efforts should also include the following  steps: 
• The federal government should revise the National  Cyber Incident Response Plan (NCIRP)—the plan  that details how federal, SLTT, and private entities  should respond to and recover from significant cyber  incidents impacting critical infrastructure197—by  adding scenario-specific and sector-specific annexes  drafted together with sector-specific agencies and  Sector Coordinating Councils.  
• The annexes of the NCIRP should account for  options to mobilize additional resources to augment  the government’s response, including private-sec tor incident responders, the DoD under Defense  Support to Civil Authorities, the National Guard,  and other SLTT assets. 
• Planning efforts should be integrated and interoper able with existing emergency response and disaster  recovery mechanisms and programs operated by  federal and SLTT entities. 
3.3.4 Expand Coordinated Cyber Exercises,  Gaming, and Simulation 
Preparedness planning leads to defined response mech anisms, public awareness, and improved response. In  practice, however, plans can be rendered ineffective by  unforeseen challenges and limitations.198 Exercises build  understanding of how complex systems will react in a  time of disruption or crisis, building cohesion among dis parate entities coordinating the response and promoting  unity of effort that can translate to seamless integration  when an incident does occur.  
Congress should support and fund FEMA and CISA in  implementing expanded and coordinated cross-sector  cyber exercises, gaming, and simulation, as well as sec tor-specific agencies in smaller, sector-specific exercises.  The existing cohort of exercises, including GridEx,199 Hamilton,200 and Cyber Storm,201 cover a portion of  what is necessary for overall national cybersecurity, but  they should be enhanced and expanded to include joint  exercises among the private sector, the federal govern ment, SLTT entities, and, when and where possible,  international partners. These exercises should also be used  as the primary mechanism by which the U.S. government  exercises Continuity of the Economy planning. Such  exercises should also emphasize the importance of ensur ing resilient communications among key stakeholders  and continuous engagement with the general public. 
3.3.5 Establish a Biennial National Cyber  Tabletop Exercise 
Exercises that account for and incorporate all elements  of national power are critical both in demonstrating and  ensuring the United States’ ability to respond to and  recover from cyber disruption and in reducing adversar ies’ confidence that attacks are able to achieve strategic  objectives and shape U.S. behavior. While various depart ments and agencies in the U.S. government regularly  conduct exercises on cyber incident response, the United  States lacks a persistent senior-level exercise that incor porates the whole-of-government and whole-of-nation  approach necessary for effective response and recovery. 
64 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
Congress therefore should direct the U.S.    
government to plan and execute on a  
biennial basis a national-level cyber table 
top exercise that involves senior leaders  
) 
from the executive branch, Congress,  
s
i
v
a
state governments, and the private sector,  
D
 
e
g
r
as well as international partners, where  
o
e
G
 
.
appropriate. 
t
g
S
 
ff
• This “National Cyber Tabletop  
a
t
S
 
y
Exercise” should be organized and  
b
 
o
t
o
led by the National Cyber Director  
h
P
 
/
 
(recommendation 1.3) with the sup 
d
r
a
u
port of the DHS, FBI, and DoD,  
G
 
l
a
n
in coordination with sector-specific  
o
i
t
a
agencies, state governments, and  
N
 
y
m
r
private-sector partners. 
A
 
.
S
.
• The exercise should be used as an  
U
(
opportunity to operationalize,  
troubleshoot, and inform prepared ness programs such as Continuity  of the Economy planning and to  test the effectiveness of response and  recovery measures such as the Cyber  State of Distress and the Cyber Response  and Recovery Fund. 
Army National Guard personnel analyze network traffic during a Cyber Shield  19 training week class at Camp Atterbury, Ind. April 7, 2019. As the nation’s  largest unclassified cyber defense training exercise, Cyber Shield provides  participants with training on industry network infrastructure and cyber protec tion best practices.
about what activities the National Guard can conduct and  be reimbursed for with federal funding.203 In addition,  
• The exercise should also be used as an opportunity  to improve, inform, and guide resilience measures,  such as the National Cybersecurity Assistance Fund  (recommendation 3.1.2) and other efforts that fall  within the National Risk Management Cycle and the  National Critical Infrastructure Resilience Strategy  (recommendation 3.1.1). 
3.3.6 Clarify the Cyber Capabilities and  Strengthen the Interoperability of the  National Guard 
States have increasingly relied on National Guard units  under state active duty and Title 32 of the U.S. Code to  prepare for, respond to, and recover from cybersecurity  
incidents that overwhelm state and local assets.202 While  Title 32 has been interpreted to allow for these activities,  Department of Defense guidelines leave ambiguities  
it is unclear how state cyber incident response forces,  including the National Guard in state active-duty status,  would integrate with federal personnel and processes when  responding to a significant cyber incident, and current fed eral cyber incident response planning does not sufficiently  account for or integrate the role of the National Guard.  
• Congress should direct DoD to update existing  policies to consider National Guard activities that  could be performed and reimbursed under Title 32  of the U.S. Code.204 
• The National Guard Bureau should promulgate  guidance to its constituent cyber units on CISA’s and  the FBI’s cyber roles and responsibilities, the agencies’  local presence and capabilities, ways to collaborate  during times of stability (e.g., through local multia gency task forces and information-sharing groups),  and incident response planning and exercises. 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 65 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
• The Department of Homeland Security should more  regularly integrate state cyber incident response  forces, including the National Guard in state active duty status, as part of response and recovery plan ning and exercises and should define mechanisms to  ensure interoperability at times of crisis. 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #3:  
• The role of the National Guard should be assessed  and where appropriate incorporated into DHS and  executive branch cyber response planning efforts,  including the update to the National Cyber Incident  Response Plan and annexes. 
ENSURE THE SECURITY OF OUR ELECTIONS AND RESILIENCE OF  OUR DEMOCRACY 
The U.S. government should ensure the security of our elections and resilience of our democracy. Americans’  trust and confidence in their democratic system remain foundational elements of national resilience—and  an attractive target for malicious actors. The network of institutions, tools, and personnel that compose  our electoral system depend on connectivity and data, introducing new vectors to disrupt the U.S. political  system, including at and beyond the ballot box. The federal institutions charged with protecting our electoral  process require organizational reform, enduring funding streams, and modern mandates to ensure that  states and other partners in our political system, including political parties and campaigns, can improve and  maintain their cybersecurity capacity—and ensure that our electoral systems retain a verifiable, auditable  paper trail and paper-based balloting backbone. Going beyond elections, the U.S. government must also seek  to better understand and counter broader cyber threats targeting our democratic institutions. 
Key Recommendation 
3.4 Congress should improve the structure and enhance funding of the Election Assistance  Commission (EAC), enabling it to increase its operational capacity to support states and localities  in defense of the digital infrastructure underpinning federal elections—including ensuring the  widest possible employment of voter-verifiable, auditable, paper-based voting systems.  
Trust is the lifeblood of American democracy. The  American people depend on government institu tions, infrastructure, tools, and personnel to provide  a fair, open, and safe electoral system in which every  vote counts and election results reflect the will of the  American voter. The election system’s increasing reliance  on digital connectivity and data makes it vulnerable to  cyberattacks and cyber-enabled information operations  such as those seen in 2016 and 2018 and likely already  under way in 2020.205 
Defending against attempts to undermine the American  people’s trust in their democracy requires improving insti tutional capacity at the federal, state, local, tribal, and  territorial levels and ensuring that our elections utilize  a voter-verifiable, auditable, paper-based voting system.  States need assistance in the form of enduring, targeted  funding to secure and maintain their election infrastruc ture, and the federal institutions administering such  assistance require additional funds and structural reform  to do so at the scale and speed of the threat. Election 
66 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
officials should also be resourced with the tools and    
expertise to develop and rehearse plans for Election Day  
contingencies, including postponements and recounts.  
Such contingency plans should be developed in consul 
tation with federal cybersecurity experts from CISA and  
should include clear criteria established well in advance.  
Enhance Support to the Election Assistance Commission  
to Carry Out Its Mission: The EAC suffers from chronic  
funding shortages and requires a more robust staff to better  
execute its responsibilities for improving SLTT election  
cybersecurity capacity. Further, the EAC commissioners  
require more technical expertise to enact urgent reforms  
to protect the integrity of voting systems against malicious  
cyber activity. By increasing the EAC’s capacity and adding  
a limited but crucial “cybersecurity vote,” policymakers will  
) 
y
g
ensure that evolving threats to the integrity of our electoral  
r
e
n
E
 
process are better understood and prioritized. Specifically: 
f
o
 
t
n
• Congress should amend the Help America Vote Act  
e
m
t
r
to create a fifth nonpartisan commissioner with an  
a
p
e
D
established cybersecurity background in order to vote  
 
.
S
.
U
exclusively on issues of or relating to cybersecurity. 
(
• Congress should increase the EAC’s annual operating  budget to enable the hiring of new staff to improve  the performance of core responsibilities. 
• The EAC should finalize and release its long-delayed  update to the Voluntary Voting System Guidelines  and increase the breadth and frequency of its recom mendations and guidance concerning voting systems  and processes. 
Streamline and Modernize Sustained Grant Funding for States  to Improve Election Systems: While Congress has appropri ated funds to improve SLTT election systems, the episodic  nature of such funding has prevented states from making  plans that rely on it. Congressional grant funding for  election security should occur predictably and regularly, and  the EAC should disburse those funds and monitor their  expenditure. At a minimum, grant funds should be used to  ensure that states implement voter-verifiable and paper based voting systems, as well as post-election audits. Funds  should also be used to ensure that election administrators  
The Vulnerability Assessment Team at Argonne National  Laboratory tests an electronic voting machine for security.
have sufficient provisional ballots for their eligible voting  populations to reduce or eliminate the effect of interference  with the voter registration rolls. The federal government has  a responsibility to resource its requirements, but states must  also share in their financial ownership of election adminis tration. Specifically, the U.S. government should: 
• Appropriate election security grants sufficient to  enable state, local, tribal, and territorial governments  to implement voter-verifiable, auditable voting  systems, including by replacing outdated voting  equipment, building local capacity, and adopting a  paper-based backbone. 
• Sustain an annual grant appropriation to provide for  sufficient provisional ballots, the implementation of  post-election audits, and the ongoing maintenance of  systems into the future. 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 67 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
• Require states to match federal election grant funds  at a 70–30 percent federal-state split and engage in  long-term planning for their election infrastructure  upgrades, including best practices recommended by  
organizations like the Center for Internet Security. 
Enabling Recommendation 
3.4.1 Modernize Campaign Regulations to  Promote Cybersecurity 
Nation-state adversaries have repeatedly attempted to  hack U.S. political campaigns for the dual purposes  of gathering intelligence and sowing political discord  through the selective disclosure of otherwise private, cam paign-specific information.206 Campaign organizations  need more resources to protect themselves, but federal  campaign finance law (1) limits the financial support that  
What Is a Malign Influence Campaign? 
national political parties can provide to campaigns, and  (2) broadly prohibits corporate contributions to cam paigns. While these limitations have been imposed for  good reasons and should remain in place, an unintended  consequence is that they have functionally limited the  cybersecurity support available to campaigns.  
In the past few years, the Federal Election Commission  has issued several advisory opinions authorizing certain  corporations to provide cybersecurity assistance to  campaigns. These opinions are narrowly tailored, how ever, and fail to provide sufficient assurance that similar  (or expanded) requests will be approved in the future. By  contrast, a statutory amendment would provide much needed clarity and flexibility regarding this vital issue.  Congress therefore should amend the Federal Election 
On May 21, 2016, two groups of demonstrators encountered one another outside an Islamic center in Houston, Texas. One  group was attending a gathering called “Stop Islamification [sic] of Texas,” while the other had shown up for a “Save Islamic  Knowledge” event. Verbal insults and physical confrontations ensued.207 
Both groups had been drawn to the Islamic center by two sets of social media advertisements purchased for $200 by a Russian  information operations cell or “troll farm” called the Internet Research Agency (IRA).208 During the 2016 election cycle more  than 3,000 different advertisements purchased by the IRA made their way into the social media feeds of everyday Americans.209 These citizens were microtargeted with the same methods used by mainstream consumer advertisers.210 
The modern digital economy is built on a model of directing consumers to tailored advertisements after observing their  behavior. Disturbingly, our adversaries use the very same approach against us and even do so legally. A growing sector of  Russian “Manipulation Service Providers” like the IRA create fake accounts on popular social media websites to influence  online discourse. These fake accounts can drive the comments, clicks, likes, and shares that social media algorithms interpret  as popularity.211 Other authoritarians are learning from Russia’s example; China is rapidly honing its own efforts to influence  democratic societies, most brazenly during Taiwan’s recent election cycles.212 
Combating this kind of disinformation will require coordination between the public and private sectors to identify and shut  down fake accounts, but the threat will continue to far exceed our capacity to respond. A sustainable solution will require  equipping Americans with the media and digital literacy necessary to recognize untrustworthy online content. Such a resilient  public—one that understands the value of democracy, the role of its institutions, and the ways in which individuals can help  hold those institutions accountable—will find it easier to resist disguised pernicious disinformation intended to undermine  trust and lead to disengagement.
68 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
Campaign Act of 1971 (FECA) to allow corporations to  provide free and reduced-cost cybersecurity assistance to  political campaigns, so long as such assistance is offered  
Key Recommendation 
PROMOTE NATIONAL RESILIENCE 
on a nonpartisan basis as assessed by neutral and objec tive criteria.213
3.5 The U.S. government should promote digital literacy, civics education, and public awareness  to build societal resilience to foreign malign cyber-enabled information operations. 
Like American democracy, a safe and secure cyberspace  environment depends on the trust and educated stake holdership of its users. While service providers and  product manufacturers are working to develop security  frameworks that do not overburden end users, individual  Americans are still the most important guarantors of  their individual and collective cybersecurity. A third of  all breaches still stem from a malign actor’s success in  persuading individuals to open phishing emails, one of  the simplest forms of social engineering.214 
Similarly, cyber-enabled information operations are  increasingly taking their assaults on trust beyond cyber space and into our broader society. Therefore, we should  respond beyond cyberspace, because “[t]he defense of  democracy in an age of cyber information war cannot  rely on technology alone.”215 Americans must become  better equipped to recognize such operations, so that they  can mitigate their damage. These information operations  endanger our national security by threatening to under mine trust and confidence in American democracy and  its institutions—including but also extending beyond  our elections.216 Such operations have previously taken  the form of hack-and-release attacks and disinforma tion campaigns on social media and other outlets.217 These campaigns seek to convince Americans that their  democracy is irrevocably broken, leading them to conflict  out of anger or to disengagement out of despair.218 Improving digital literacy is one way to counter these  threats, but alone it is insufficient. Because the intent of  so many cyber-enabled information operations is to cause  Americans to distrust or lose faith in democracy and its  
institutions, digital literacy should be coupled with civics  education explaining what democracy is, how individuals  can hold their leadership accountable, and why democ racy must be nurtured and protected. 
For these reasons, the U.S. government must ensure  that individual Americans have both the digital literacy  tools and the civics education they need to secure their  networks and their democracy from cyber-enabled infor mation operations.  
Promote Digital Literacy and Modernize Civic Education: By promoting modern civics education and digital  literacy programs, the U.S. government can assist in  enhancing the average American’s ability to discern the  trustworthiness of online content, and thereby reduce  the impact of malicious foreign cyber-enabled infor mation campaigns, without running afoul of concerns  about regulating speech. Congress should enable the  Department of Education by authorizing a grant pro gram funding nongovernmental organizations (NGOs),  private-sector entities, and SLTT education agencies both  to study how best to improve digital citizenship and to  incorporate effective digital literacy curricula in American  classrooms at the K-12 level and beyond. This program  should run in tandem with DHS programs and with the  collaboration of subject matter experts to develop content  on cyber-enabled information operations and other  topics of which citizens should be aware. Such curricula  should incorporate critical thinking and problem-solving  skills, information on implicit vs. explicit messaging, and  technology concepts.  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 69 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
Evaluate and Strengthen Efforts to Raise Public Awareness  of Cyber Threats: Congress should (1) direct the  Government Accountability Office (GAO) to evaluate  the effectiveness of government spending on cyberse curity awareness efforts, including the “Stop. Think.  Connect.” campaign, and (2) authorize and fund DHS,  in coordination with the National Institute of Standards  and Technology (NIST) and the National Science  Foundation (NSF), to establish a grant program seek ing research and proposals for effective mechanisms to  improve, develop, and implement a public awareness and  education initiative on cybersecurity. Successful grantees  should prioritize:  
• Actionable, consistent public messaging on cyberse curity threats and responses with very specific desired  outcomes.  
• Wide propagation of cybersecurity warnings among  information technology (IT) professionals.  
• Modern, vetted, and continually updated “train-the trainer” resources for academic institutions, trade  schools, and other organizations seeking to provide  cybersecurity education to the public.  
• Demonstrably effective methods for bringing specific  and actionable cyber threat information to the atten tion of the general public. 
Multi-factor Authentication 
Enabling Recommendation 
3.5.1 Reform Online Political Advertising to  Defend against Foreign Influence in Elections Although foreign nationals are banned from contribut ing to U.S. political campaigns, they are still allowed to  purchase U.S. political advertisements online, making the  internet a fertile environment for conducting a malign  influence campaign to undermine American elections.  In advance of the 2016 U.S. federal elections, Russia  launched just such a campaign and purchased thousands  of online political ads targeting U.S. elections.219 That  action was and still is possible because the FECA, which  establishes rules for transparency in television, radio, and  print media political advertising, has not been amended  to extend the same political advertising requirements to  internet platforms. Applying these standards across all  media of communication would, among other things,  increase transparency of funding for political advertise ments, which would in turn strengthen regulators’ ability  to reduce improper foreign influence in our elections.  There are pending legislative proposals on this critical  issue, and Congress should seek to find a consensus.  
According to the SANS Institute, single-factor authentication (e.g., passwords) is a major threat vector that malicious actors  exploit to breach seemingly secure systems. One of the best methods to prevent these types of attacks is multi-factor  authentication, or a system that requires a password and an additional method, such as a text or an “authenticator” appli cation, for users to authenticate their identity when logging into a system. Researchers at Google found that even the most  basic multi-factor verification methods prevent 96 percent of bulk phishing attacks and more than three-quarters of targeted  attacks.220 Both consumers and businesses should take full advantage of multi-factor authentication to protect their networks,  their accounts, and their information.
70 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
RESHAPE THE CYBER ECOSYSTEM  TOWARD GREATER SECURITY
Denying adversaries benefits is crucial for success ful layered cyber deterrence. Whereas building  resilience denies adversaries benefits by managing the  consequences of attacks, reshaping the cyber ecosystem  toward greater security drives down cyber vulnerability  at national scale, lowering the likelihood of successful  attacks in the first place. In cyber conflict, the cyber  ecosystem is the battlefield. Unlike more conventional  battlefields, the cyber ecosystem is entirely human made and therefore can be manipulated in ways other  domains may not be. This feature provides a unique  opportunity for the United States to shape its cyber  ecosystem in ways that make it more difficult for  adversaries to achieve their goals and that deny them the  benefits of their operations. Today, the cyber ecosystem  is more than the technology—information, network,  and operational technology—that constitutes the  internet. The ecosystem is also the people, processes,  and organizations that plug into the technology and  the data they combine to produce. This ecosystem has  increased the speed of our communications as well as  efficiency, functionality, and growth in the economy.  But while it is central to the functioning of the nation,  it has also introduced significant challenges—causing  vulnerability across the United States. Adversaries lever age vulnerabilities in this ecosystem and its expansive  reach into our society to gain an asymmetric advantage,  developing capabilities to hold our critical infrastructure  at risk, disrupt our elections, and spy on and target the  American people.  
This pillar attempts to drive down vulnerability across the  ecosystem by shifting the burden of security away from  end users to owners and operators, developers, and man ufacturers who can more effectively implement security  solutions at the appropriate scale. In some cases, scaling  up security means aligning market forces. Where those  market forces either are not present or do not adequately  
address risk, the U.S. government must explore exec utive action, investment, legislation, and regulation.  Specifically, this pillar focuses on five strategic objectives. 
First, this pillar seeks to promote the creation of more  secure technology—both by incentivizing product  manufacturers to scrap a “first to market” mentality in  favor of a “secure to market” approach and by ensuring  that they have access to trusted suppliers. Technology  companies are under intense market pressure to prioritize  “first to market” over security, thereby passing on risk to  companies and individuals. The aggregated vulnerability  assumed by these companies and individuals has created  a significant national concern: rampant insecurity that  passes costs of billions of dollars to downstream consum ers and that has the potential both to disrupt our day-to day life and to undermine public confidence in and the  effectiveness of key institutions.  
Second, this pillar endeavors to change behavior, encour aging more secure practices by users and organizations.  Standards bodies and regulators in key sectors have devel oped numerous standards and best practices for organiza tions’ behavior. However, with some notable exceptions,  commitment to these standards and practices is largely  voluntary. Incentivizing better practices—including those  that would shape or offset the behavior of individual  employees—means both crafting financial incentives for  better behavior, through a vibrant insurance market, and  holding bad behavior to account. 
Third, this pillar seeks to better leverage large-scale infor mation and communications technology enablers—both  by empowering companies that can deploy security across  
the ecosystem and by encouraging them to deploy it.  While the U.S. government’s ability to directly influence  the ecosystem is limited, companies that provide services  and infrastructure essential to the functioning of the  
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 71 
PILLARS AND KEY RECOMMENDATIONS 
internet could have outsized impact on its security. For  these entities, some forms of security—what is required  to ensure that the services they provide are always avail able—are already incentivized. The financial benefit of  
other aspects of security—ensuring the integrity and con fidentiality of the data they hold and the networks they  administer—is often less obvious, but no less important  for managing national vulnerability. 
Fourth, as technology supply chains have become more  complex and global, the United States has grown more  dependent on suppliers susceptible to malign influence, a  possibility that creates new vectors to introduce vulnera bilities into the ecosystem. In shaping its cyber ecosystem,  the United States must identify industries and technologies  critical to national and economic security and take steps  to reduce vulnerability at a macroeconomic level (e.g.,  industrial strategy and market exclusions) and at a micro economic level (e.g., supply chain risk management). 
STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE #1:  
Fifth, this pillar attempts to build better data security at  the systemic level. New industries are being created that  rely on the concentration and analysis of private data, but  they are emerging in an ecosystem with few norms and  complex, and at times even conflicting, laws governing  the appropriate use and security of that data. At the same  time, breaches of private data offer malicious actors a  treasure trove of information. The information stolen  from American entrepreneurs, public officials, industry  leaders, everyday citizens, and even clandestine operatives  is fueling social engineering and espionage campaigns  against U.S. firms and agencies. This entanglement of pri vate data security and national security reveals the need  for legal and technical norms to protect the information  of individuals and firms, minimize the likelihood of their  loss or manipulation, and make the “big data” economy  safe for everyday Americans. 
INCENTIVIZE GREATER SECURITY IN THE MARKETS FOR TECHNOLOGY 
The U.S. government should incentivize the creation of more secure technology. Currently, technology  companies are under intense market pressure to prioritize being “first to market” over security, an approach  that in turn passes risk on to other companies and individuals.221 Moving the markets for technologies  toward greater security requires delineating clearer expectations and standards for what constitutes secure  technology development and maintenance, presenting that information to consumers in an accessible form  to help them make informed decisions, and incentivizing suppliers to build security into the development  lifecycle of the products they sell. 
Key Recommendation 
4.1 Congress should establish and fund a National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling  Authority empowered to establish and manage a program for voluntary security certifications and  labeling of information and communications technology products.
While agreed-on security standards and best practices are  useful in reducing vulnerability in information technology  products, they can be employed more effectively to move  
product developers to use security as a product differen tiator. Without accessible and transparent mechanisms,  such as certifications (e.g., Energy Star, Underwriters  
72 Cyberspace Solarium Commission 
RESHAPE THE CYBER ECOSYSTEM TOWARD GREATER SECURITY 
Laboratory, or Certified Organic products) and labels (e.g.,  nutrition labels), to compare security between products,  critical infrastructure owners and operators cannot easily  price security into their purchasing decisions.222 The lack  of differentiation leads to a lack of demand for more secure  products; as a result, product developers have little market  incentive to make established security standards or security  best practices a primary consideration in designing, testing,  and developing their products. Short of regulation, the  U.S. government is institutionally and legally limited in its  ability to attest and certify that products adhere to secu rity standards, and third-party efforts to fill this gap lack  sufficient scale, funding, and maturity to enact meaningful  change in the marketplace.223 
To address this gap, Congress should pass a law directing  the Department of Commerce, in coordination with  the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) and the  Department of Defense (DoD), to hold a competitive  bid for a nonprofit, nongovernmental organization to  be designated and funded as the National Cybersecurity  Certification and Labeling Authority. This organization  would be charged with establishing and managing a vol untary cybersecurity certification and labeling program for  information and communication technologies.224 This des ignation should last five years and carry with it sufficient  funding for its operational costs and the programmatic  activities necessary to carry out its mission. The National  Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority should  be overseen by a committee chaired by the Department of  Commerce and DHS, with membership from DoD, the  Department of Energy, and the Federal Trade Commission  (FTC). The law should also empower the FTC to set and  levy fines if it is found that companies are falsely attesting  to a standard for certification, are intentionally mislabeling  products, or have failed to maintain the standard to which  they have attested. 
In order to keep pace with rapidly changing technology  and good practices in secure technology development,  the National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling  Authority must be supported by empirical efforts both to  
test products and to continually identify good practices  in secure product development. Any certification and  labeling work should build on existing endeavors in and  outside of government, including such efforts as the  Critical Technology Security Centers (recommendation  4.1.1), the Cyber Independent Testing Laboratory, the  Digital Standard, and the Software Bills of Material work  at the National Telecommunications and Information  Administration (NTIA).225 
Product Certification and Attestation: The National  Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority  should be established and empowered to publicly certify  products that vendors have attested meet and comply  with secure product development best practices and other  cybersecurity standards identified by the authority. Issued  certifications should be publicly accessible and manufac turers should be encouraged to display certification marks  on product packaging. For industrial control systems,  network technology, and open-source code projects,  the proposed Critical Technology Security Centers  could serve as testing centers in support of the National  Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling Authority. 
Accredited Certifying Agents: Like the organics certifying  program run by the U.S. Department of Agriculture,  the National Cybersecurity Certification and Labeling  Program should be empowered to define criteria and a  process for accrediting nongovernmental organizations as  certifying agents. Agents should be accredited to certify  individual classes of products. For example, an entity  could apply to be a certifying agent that specifically  reviews connected industrial control systems, internet  of things (IoT) devices, operating systems, cloud service  offerings (recommendation 4.5), or voting machines,  among other things. 
Comparative Security Scoring: In coordination with the  National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST)  and subject matter experts across the federal govern ment, academia, relevant nongovernmental organiza tions, and the private sector, the National Cybersecurity 
Cyberspace Solarium Commission 73